
New media may be ‘new’ because they have not
existed before, but do have antecedents. They
incorporate old media, transforming or remediating
them (Bolter and Grusin, 2000). Even ‘born digital’
products emulate the form, language and syntax of
older media. A blog (web log), for example, is a
combination town crier performance, personal
diary, and news magazine. The open access online
encyclopedia Wikipedia1 has the look and function-
ality of a print encyclopedia, albeit with the
transforming power of online searching and brows-
ing. Even the windowed and mixed media computer
desktop, charged with electric speed, dynamic color
and hyperactivity, recreates the research environment
of the analog scholar sitting at her desk, surrounded
by multiple open books, notes, articles, data, images,
and a complex reference system close at hand.
Advances in new media may one day create truly
‘new’, original electronic products, but for now,
from digital facsimiles to virtual worlds, electronic
products seem oddly familiar and the hype about
newness overdone. Current library electronic pro-
ducts fall, with few exceptions, into two categories:
digital facsimiles of works originally published in
‘old’ media formats—print, microform, image, and
audio—or products that have functionally evolved
more or less closely from an analog precursor. Early
English Books Online (EEBO) is an example of the
former, and Encyclopaedia Britannica Online, the
latter. Electronic products currently dominating
library collections—abstract and indexing databases,
electronic journals and books, news services,
streaming video and audio, and data—are copies
or sequels of analog counterparts.
Remediation is a relatively new scholarly
concept rarely if ever applied in discussions on
issues related to the digitization of primary texts.
Subsequently any analysis and discussion related to
remediation within library scholarship would be
a welcome contribution to this new media
studies field. This article limits its discussion to
remediation and the digitized facsimile, specifically
to EEBO. EEBO is particularly interesting, not only
because of its considerable scholarly importance,
but for its multi-layered genesis from print
copy to microfilm facsimile, and from microfilm
to digitized facsimile, making it a model of
remediation.
Correspondence:
Diana Kichuk,
University of Saskatchewan
Library, Rm. 163, ITS, Main
Library, 3 Campus Drive,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
S7N 5A4 Canada.
E-mail:
diana.kichuk@usask.ca
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm018 Advance Access Published on 18 June 2007
291
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
What is the impact of remediation in digital
facsimiles? Is the scholar examining the work
itself—the Early English book or broadside in the
case of EEBO—as vendors and many eminent
scholars claim? Is it a faithful copy of the text and
the physical object? Alternatively, does the process
of digitization and remediation transform the
original work into a virtual artifact with an ersatz
resemblance to an original? Are there limits to the
use of digital reproduction as scholarly evidence?
These questions do not devalue EEBO. Digital
facsimiles such as EEBO have unquestionable
scholarly interest and value. However, are they
what they purport to be—an exact copy of the
original? Scholarship can benefit by a greater
awareness of the impact of remediation and the
limits of digital facsimiles. After examining the
genesis of EEBO and the impact of remediation,
this article will conclude with a brief speculation on
how EEBO could improve its already formidable
scholarly value.
1 Remediation
Jay David Bolter and Richard Grusin applied
Marshall McLuhan’s insight, ‘the ‘‘content’’ of any
medium is always another medium’ (McLuhan,
2001), to digital media, and named the concept,
remediation. Remediation (re-media-tion, with
the emphasis on media) is the re-presentation of
one medium in another. It is the appropriation
or re-purposing of old media in new media (Bolter
and Grusin, 2000). McLuhan referred to this
aggressive takeover of one medium by another as
‘hybridizing or compounding’ (McLuhan, 2001).
The juxtaposition of old and new media and the
replacement of one medium with another through
reproduction, insertion, and hypertext linking are
characteristic of the persistent mosaic quality of
digital media.
According to Bolter and Grusin, digital media
remediate old media in several ways (Bolter and
Grusin, 2000). The range of remediation types is
not exclusive and a work may manifest more
than one. EEBO, for example, displays elements
of all remediation types, especially the first two.
The following is an interpretative summary of the
Bolter and Grusin remediation types:
(1) The remediation is the ‘real thing’ or a clone
with a primary focus on the old medium. The
remediation is a ‘faithful’ facsimile, as if the
old medium could migrate to the new
medium without alteration. For example,
digital art image galleries or manuscript
collections are often presented as real paint-
ings on a gallery wall or manuscripts on a
library study table. A publisher brochure
boldly asserts that works in EEBO are ‘as
they appeared in their original printed
editions.’2
(2) The remediation seeks to improve the old
medium. The old medium is still the focus,
but it is ‘improved’. Digital remediation
provides better access, adds sound, hyper-
links, search capability, and so on. The
publisher disregards unintended conse-
quences (such as scale distortion or detail
loss) as if they are benign, portraying
transformations to original works in digital
facsimile products like EEBO as ‘improve-
ments’. Full bibliographic records, browse and
search capability, indexed illustrations, and
downloadable image files in varying sizes
within an integrated access interface—add
value without parallel to the original print or
microfilm media.
(3) The old medium is intentionally refashioned or
changed. The new medium refashions the
older medium more or less aggressively.
Unlike EEBO, the integrated EEBO Text
Creation Partnership (EEBO-TCP) project
represents a radical departure from the
original work. EEBO-TCP manually tran-
scribes selected EEBO works into searchable
text.
(4) The old medium is ‘absorbed’ into the new
media without a trace. The new medium
proposes to absorb the older medium and
erase it, or at least that is the intended
outcome. As an example, computer games
remediate cinema, with players becoming
characters in an interactive film-like narrative.
EEBO attempts to bring everything to the
D. Kichuk
292 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
scholar’s desktop—replacing the need to
travel, to navigate catalogs and indexes, to
access remote shelves and dusty books or
unwieldy microfilm reels—and banish the
appalling expenditure of time, while offering
the scholar the experience of turning pages of
the original as if in a carrel in a far away
library.
Bolter and Grusin find that digital media display
dual traits of remediation: immediacy and hyperme-
diacy (Bolter and Grusin, 2000). On one level, digital
media provide an immersive and transparent experi-
ence, an immediacy that permits the user to
‘disappear’ into the screen or virtual world. In an
ongoing dialectic, the transparency of immediacy
couples with the opacity of the hyper-mediated,
windowed, fragmented and interactive reality of
interfaces and multi-media. The more hyper-
mediated the digital object, the more fragmented is
the user’s experience and the more media conscious.
2 The Genesis of EEBO
2.1 From print to microfilm facsimile
In the mid-1930s under the specter of world war,
there were concerns about the preservation of
Britain’s culturally important book collections.
At the time microfilm was the high-tech archive
option in the western world (seventy-five years later,
despite the rise of digitization projects, microfilm still
has abiding relevance for archive and scholarly
purposes). In 1938, University Microfilm Inc.
(UMI; now a division of ProQuest Information and
Learning) initiated its first microfilm facsimile
collection: Early English Books I, 1475–1640 (EEB I).
In 1957, it launched Early English Books II, 1641–1700
(EEB II). Scholars often refer to the two collections as
EEB. UMI based the selection of works in EEB on two
print catalogs often referred to as the STC or Short-
Title Catalogue of English Books.3 The publisher
released Thomason Tracts and Early English Books
Tract Supplement later as companion collections.4
EEB and its companion collections contain micro-
graphic images of at least one representative copy
of potentially all printed books and tracts printed
in Britain and its dependencies between 1475
and 1700.5 While UMI completed the bulk of EEB
by 1988, filming is still ongoing, though at a much
slower rate. One of the earliest examples of facsimile
production using microfilm technology, EEB is
arguably still one of the most important microfilm
facsimile collections in existence today.
From the outset, UMI used the recently perfected
35 mm microfilm camera and silver halide on
acetate base 35 mm film. After the 1980s, it used
the more stable polyester base film. EEB has three
film generations: a first-generation master or
preservation negative-polarity film (white on a
black background), a copy negative, and multiple
working copies (either negative or positive polarity)
for distribution to subscribing institutions.
Positive polarity images have black text or illustra-
tions on a white background, the standard polarity
of distribution copies.
Operators filmed the pages of bound works
sequentially in an ‘open book’ layout—two facing
pages (‘two-up’) with a gutter shadow down the
center. Until standards and technology improved,
early images in particular display varying degrees of
distortion—for example, poor registration of the
work within the frame or under or overexposed
images. Early image quality varied dramatically
from one image or reel to another, depending on
equipment, applied standards, and individual tech-
nical skill or discretion of human operators in
libraries doing the filming. Filmed in black and
white at low resolution, the content images are
essentially bi-tonal. Gradations of original color or
grayscale, for example print variations in hand-press
incunabula, are remediated within a narrow range
of black to ‘less black’ on a white ground.
Rubricated letters and marks show up as mottled
black shapes with only softened edges and reduced
contrast to distinguish them from adjacent text.
Operators excluded images that might not convert
well to black and white, for example, the frontis-
piece paintings in works from the incunabula
period. Operators systematically excluded front
matter and end papers, including handwritten
notes added by a reader. Operators used image
cropping liberally to fit the ‘open book’ image into
the available film area or in a misguided attempt to
correct the registration of a seriously misaligned
Remediation in Early English Books Online
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007 293
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
print text or illustration. As a result, there are
marginalia information losses including margin
width and page size.
Although its major scholarly contribution may
be to preserve primary sources and distribute them
to a broad swath of scholars who could never hope
to travel and examine the original print, EEB took
on a value and life of its own. It developed its own
mystique and loyalists. EEB became a ‘must have’
acquisition for academic collections of a certain size
and pretension. Scholars became adept at consulting
works on backlit screens of varying light quality, and
scrolling microfilm reels on readers of various
vintages and technical advancement. Doing research
with microfilm has its own unique set of prepara-
tions, etiquette, and inimitable ambience. The row
on row of labeled boxes, reels with restraining
strings and rubber bands, the fussy set-up. The
whirring sound at the start and fast forward and
back and clack-clack-clack of the disengaging film at
the end of a session; the careful handling by the
fragile film edges and smell of dust and off-gassing.
The opacity of gray acetate and transparency of
polyester film, image scratches and blotches from
damaged or disintegrating film, specks of dust,
blurred text and images, cropped and skewed pages,
and shifting registers and scales. The unforgettable
feeling of motion sickness as the film moves slowly
by and sense of infantile helplessness as a film
unravels or breaks.
Historian Barbara Tuchman expressed the
ambivalence scholars feel about microfilm in Terry
Sanders 2001 film, Slow Fires: On the Preservation of
the Human Record—‘I don’t really like microfilm
except for the fact that it’s often indispensable’
(Review, 2001). EEB became a necessary evil that no
Early English scholar could do without. Scholarship
that was unlikely or impossible while print copies
were rare, access forbidden or restricted, and travel
costs prohibitive, became not only possible but also
acceptable based on a microfilm surrogate without
the scholar ever consulting the original.
2.2 From microfilm to digital facsimile
EEBO is a major digital facsimile collection of Early
English works based on the digitization of EEB and
the Thomason Tracts. UMI began the digitization
project in the summer of 1998. Chadwyck-Healey
launched its customized online access interface in
2003. By early 2005, EEBO included over 100,000 of
the over 125,000 targeted titles and had extended
coverage back to 1473. ProQuest will add Early
English Books Tract Supplement content in 2006.
While EEBO has the stated goal of including
‘virtually every work printed’ in England and its
dependencies from 1473 to 1700, the completed
content will represent only ‘80 percent of the
surviving print record in English between 1475
and 1700’ (Schmitt, 2003). As in EEB and its
companion collections, the works cover a broad
range of subjects, including English literature,
history, philosophy, linguistics, theology, music,
fine arts, education, mathematics, science, and
women’s studies. Scholars can browse the collection
by author name, Thomason tract in the order
collected, and periodical year, issue, and title. The
basic or advanced search is run against the text of
EEBO bibliographic record fields. Institutional
subscribers to the companion EEBO-TCP database
(described below) can also search and download
ASCII text transcriptions of a targeted 25,000 EEBO
titles.
A key specification of EEBO required that ‘the
images must be delivered quickly to end-users’
(McLean, 2001). Lower resolution ensured accep-
table download transmission rates but sacrificed
image detail. EEBO’s access files are bi-tonal 1-bit6
depth images with a resolution of 400 PPI (pixels
per inch). In an unusual move, ProQuest made both
the access and master files the same resolution.
At 400 PPI, the master copy is neither a preservation
nor replacement quality facsimile. ProQuest pro-
duced EEBO from a second-generation negative
polarity EEB master in order to avoid subjecting the
original master to wear and tear (Schmitt, 2003).
The project team thought, ‘The difference between
the originals and the second generation is unde-
tectable at 400 PPI’ (Pack, 1999). The master is a
TIFF (Tagged Image File Format) file and access or
derivative files may be GIF (Graphics Interchange
Format), JPEG (Joint Photographic Experts Group),
PDF (Portable Document Format), or TIFF files,
depending on the context: default screen image,
emailed version, downloadable access copy,
D. Kichuk
294 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
or highest resolution copy intended for print or
off-line analysis.
EEBO presents works in the same sequential
‘open book’ layout as in EEB. Illustrations appear
inline in a page and as separate downloadable
images. The user can browse both page images and
extracted illustrations in a forward–backward click
through or perform a search. Alongside each brief
citation in a list of search results are applicable icon
links to a full bibliographic record, digitized
content, available illustrations, and, for subscribing
libraries, available encoded and searchable tran-
scriptions compiled by EEBO-TCP.
A generation of devoted EEB users lobbied their
institutions to acquire the more user-friendly online
version of this indispensable source. Early on, more
than 150 libraries subscribed to EEBO, a number
that exceeded the number of libraries with a
standing order for EEB over its history (Sandler,
2003). Like EEB before it, EEBO is now a ‘must
have’ scholarly tool.
EEBO preserves the limitations of microfilm—
the cropping, poor registration, and low microfilm
image granularity—while adding the strengths
and limitations unique to the digital medium—
the convenience and added value of digital access
as well as the erosion of detail. Scholars are
won over, despite EEBO’s considerable reproduc-
tion flaws.
2.3 From digital facsimile to
encoded ctext
Because image files are not directly searchable, an
EEBO search is run on the bibliographic record
alone. While relatively error-free searchable text can
be automatically compiled using Optical character
Recognition (OCR) software, not all text images
make good candidates for OCR. Early English
characters are particularly difficult to translate
because of font variability in the print. The varying
quality of EEBO digitized images only adds to the
difficulty. When running current OCR technology
against Early English works produced a high error
rate, ProQuest decided that OCR was not a viable
choice for EEBO. Even if OCR were possible,
variations in Early English spelling and punctuation
would make searching difficult and unreliable.
To resolve the problem of text searching,
ProQuest collaborated with the TCP, a project of
the University of Michigan, the University of
Oxford, and the Council on Library and
Information Resources (CLIR). The TCP creates
fully searchable texts of early English and American
published works. This collaboration established
EEBO-TCP, a collection of selected EEBO works
transcribed into searchable SGML/XML encoded
standardized text. Of the targeted 25,000 works,
approximately one-third were completed by the end
of 2005. Supporting library partners contribute
financially or operationally, and gain access
to the viewable and searchable transcriptions
within EEBO.
EEBO-TCP adds an additional production layer
to EEBO. A human operator consults the digitized
microfilm copy on screen, not the text in hand or
the microfilm copy, transcribing and tagging the
text with SGML/XML codes. While TCP transcrip-
tion standards have been carefully established, there
is room (some scholars might say—a lot of room)
for subjective interpretation of content and the
occasional human error. Keyboarding is outsourced
offshore (JISC: The Joint Information Systems
Committee, 2004). Transcribed text may stray
from the original enough to produce artifacts or
errors that influence the direction of scholarship.
Since the transcriptions are based on a digitized
microfilm image rather than the original printed
work, the text may contain omissions and distor-
tions related to the production of EEBO, and the
process of remediation.
The transcribed text is browsable, searchable, and
detached from its source. The transcription is not
just another facsimile; it is a new work. Changes of
font, typography, spelling and presentation
intended to bring clarity to the text, and embedded
coding to render the text searchable, create a new
work with an ambivalent relation to the original.
Early English authors did not write in XML mark-
up code and their readers did not read standardized
unadorned text! EEBO-TCP transcriptions are a
modern academic creation. The transcribed
text differs from the microform and digital
image formats by several degrees of manipulation
and bears the least resemblance or likeness to the
Remediation in Early English Books Online
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007 295
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
original print of the three Early English collections
described in this article.
3 Through The Digital Veil
3.1 Surrogate or ‘real thing’?
In a current online marketing brochure, ProQuest
states that EEBO includes ‘cover-to-cover full-page
images that show the works exactly as they appeared
in their original printed editions’ (italics added) and
that subscribing libraries can show users ‘what the
original readers saw, back when the Wars of the
Roses still raged’.7 Its promotional literature implies
that EEBO contains clone-like copies of the original
printed work. The student and scholar can therefore
happily reside at home or their institution and
conduct primary research, instead of traveling the
world to libraries that still permit access to the
original.
Enthusiastic scholars echo this notion of con-
sulting the ‘real thing’. John P. Schmitt, Regis
University, describes the experience of accessing
EEBO as ‘a little like waking up in the British
Library after closing time. The rare books of the
British Library, Harvard, the Folger, the
Huntington, and many others are suddenly acces-
sible in their original appearance’ (Schmitt, 2003).
The enthusiasm engendered by the liberating
experience of accessing facsimiles anywhere anytime
coupled with the potential of online analysis
undreamed of with print or microfilm, suspends
the scholar’s incredulity. The longer they look, the
more the facsimile becomes the ‘real thing’. The
scholar rationalizes the only version of the work she
will ever examine—the ‘only thing’—as the ‘real
thing’.
The EEBO image is virtual. Although it manifests
itself as a real object, it lacks the physicality of its
microfilm or print predecessors. It is a representa-
tion of the original microfilm encoded in a matrix
of binary 0’s and 1’s in a data file stored in
computer memory (Technical Advisory Service for
Images, 2006). It has multiplicity but no duration or
place. The file is decoded as pixels refreshed on the
screen at a rate that appears to the eye of the viewer
as a physical reality. However, try to touch it, and
you touch the computer screen. Try to reach in and
pull the image out magically like a rabbit from a hat,
and encounter failure. Each on-screen expression
is an ephemeral array of pixels on a computer
screen framed by the dual windows of the EEBO
interface and computer monitor, and limited in
duration to the last screen refreshment. The
ambiguous materiality of the digital image is not
unique. Photographs, for example, are a representa-
tion based on a matrix of dots. However, unlike the
virtual screen image, photographs have duration
and take up space.
While digitization gives unprecedented access
to content, that content is distorted by virtue of its
production, and the print work it purports to
represent with exactness, while seeming so tantaliz-
ingly accessible, is illusive. The materiality of the
microfilm and virtuality of the digitized object
introduce new and conflicting layers of scholarly
evidence related to remediation. In EEBO-TCP,
content is transformed through the interpretation
and re-engineering of the typographical evidence
viewed on screen.
EEB is a surrogate of an Early English printed
book (Tanselle, 2001)—itself a remediation of a
handwritten manuscript. EEBO is a surrogate of a
surrogate. However, substitution is not equivalence.
Neither the microfilm nor the digital facsimile is
equivalent to the original physical book, despite the
enthusiastic descriptions of the publisher and
scholars to the contrary. Remediation acts like a
distorting lens or opaque veil through which the
scholar ‘sees’ the mediated Early English book.
Scholars may attempt to penetrate the opacity of
the new host medium through imagination and
scholarly grit, but in the end, the facsimile is not,
and perhaps never can be ‘the real thing’ or
equivalent of the original.
3.2 Suspension of disbelief
The willing suspension of disbelief, a concept
encountered in literary theory, may account for
the scholar’s credulity before a digital facsimile. Like
the reader of a work of fiction, or a member of a live
theatre audience, the EEBO scholar is engaged
with the surrogate as if it were ‘the real thing’,
knowing very well that it is not. Claims for an
identical relationship between a digital facsimile
D. Kichuk
296 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and its original, and the transparency of the user-
resource experience, ignore the myriad transforma-
tions that occur when producing a facsimile in
another medium. The process of remediation lowers
a digital veil of varying opacity between the
scholar and the original work. The scholar, gazing
through that veil, seduced by the transformations
wrought by remediation, suspends disbelief
in order to advance the study of the text.
Successful remediation depends on the witting and
unwitting complicity of the viewer.
4 Filters and Limits
of Remediation
Digital facsimiles have changed the way the modern
scholars do their research and exposed students and
even non-academics to works they would rarely, if
ever, have viewed on microfilm and in the original
print. If the digital facsimile is to serve as a virtual
and ubiquitous stand-in for the original work and
undergo such wide scholarly scrutiny, then it is very
desirable that its identity be as true as possible.
What standard of identicalness should such a
facsimile have? Should it match the likeness of two
copies from the same print run? Despite small
differences, the illusion of identicalness in print runs
is compelling. The remediated work has a much
lower standard of identity with the original.
However earnest the effort and advanced the
technology, the migration from original to copy,
and from one medium to another results in
mutation. Remediation launches a new artifact: a
‘point of view’ copy essentially transformed through
its migration to a new medium. The following is a
review of selected production and media filters and
limits in EEBO and EEB that reveal how funda-
mental and transformative the process of remedia-
tion is, even for the facsimile, a relatively simple and
straightforward remediation type.
4.1 Digitizing microfilm
Although archival quality is superior when created
directly from print rather than microfilm,
ProQuest’s decision to digitize the microfilm
facsimiles it owned rather than print copies it did
not own, was a logical and shrewd one. The cost of
using the latter would have been prohibitive. Even if
the originals were still extant, would libraries permit
access to a commercial enterprise with so much
potential to harm their culturally important hold-
ings? In the end, the choice was fortunate since the
technology current at the time the project was
launched would almost certainly have required the
originals to be dis-bound—an alarming prospect
given the relative rarity of Early English book copies.
In the short term, scholars now find themselves with
a resource, purchased at great expense by their
institutions, that has equivocal value because it is
not a complete scholarly tool. ProQuest’s choice,
driven by economics and practicality, places the
remediated microfilm image at the center of Early
English textual studies for years to come, at least
until there is a renewed drive to digitize extant print
copies directly using state of the art technology,
thereby substantially surpassing EEB and EEBO in
resolution and completeness. EEBO prolongs the
influence of the microform facsimile and ensures
that libraries continue to acquire and maintain EEB
as a necessary supplement.
4.2 A single copy
EEB and EEBO typically include only a single copy
of an edition of a work. This pragmatic decision is
an unnecessarily limiting legacy in the digital
environment where space and access issues are less
significant than for print, and where online access
provides scholars with an ideal setting for compara-
tive analyses. For the bibliographer, one copy may
be better than nothing if no other copy exists, but as
many copies as possible is best.
4.3 The best available copy
In theory, the EEB project sought only the best
available print copy to microfilm. In practice, the
majority of selected copies came expediently from
the nearby British Museum library or The British
Library (founded in 1973 from the Museum’s core
collection). Improvements in communication and
cooperation may make it easier to identify ‘best’
copies from around the world as the EEB project
nears completion, but cost and expediency are
still major selection factors. Even if a scholar were
Remediation in Early English Books Online
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007 297
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to review all or even several print copies of a title
located in libraries across the globe, the selection of
the ‘best’ copy would be highly subjective. What is
best for one purpose may be poor for another. For
example, which is the best—an incomplete copy
that includes an exceptional hand-painted frontis-
piece, or the copy without the painting but
otherwise complete?
4.4 ‘Best quality’ image
Microfilm and digital scanning operators have a lot
of technical leeway to achieve the best quality image.
They make choices to de-speckle, de-skew, color
enhance, and edit out blemishes, annotations or
shadow from the verso page. Their technical
skill and subjective judgment affect the quality of
the image, making the notion of ‘best quality’
relative. The quality of digital images depends
on ‘the quality of the initial scan, which depends
on the equipment, its calibration, the judgment of
the scanning operator in using its capabilities,
and environmental characteristics, such as dust
and lighting’ (Arms, 1999).
4.5 Content amputation
While some content loss may be inevitable due to
the production process, a facsimile is by definition
lossless. If content is missing, it is also missing in the
original. Is content loss in EEB and EEBO benign or
a form of amputation—accidental or deliberate gaps
created for reasons of expediency, subjective pro-
duction decisions, or inherent qualities of the
medium?
 Cover-to-cover. Despite UMI’s intentions, micro-
film and subsequently digitized microfilm, do
not replicate the original cover to cover. Besides
the inevitable pages missed in the filming or
scanning process, there are other notable gaps.
Works routinely start with the title page and end
with the last page of text, excluding front and
end pages, consecutive blanks, and special front
matter, such as incunabula paintings. This
practice results in the loss of valuable details
about book production, illustration practices,
and reading practices gleaned from page notes
and inscriptions. Digital scanning adds more
human and machine error into the mix.
For example, partially scanned pages mean the
missing section is lost forever unless rescanned.
 Cropping. By current microfilm and digital
standards (The Library of Congress, 1997), an
image must include a minimum margin sur-
round of a target object. This standard, some-
times referred to as the ‘1-inch rule’, guarantees
that an object is captured in its entirety,
including its edges. Especially in the early years,
EEB scanning operators routinely cropped page
margins to fit the narrow 35 mm film width or
correct skew. By slicing away important material
evidence such as marginalia or poor plate
registration, systematic cropping misrepresents
the physicality of the original work (Viscomi,
2002).
 Binding evidence. By systematically excluding
images of binding covers and spines, EEB and
EEBO contain no evidence for the study of
binding techniques, or cover or spine design and
lettering. Current digital facsimile projects, such
as the British Library’s Turning the Pages8
project, routinely reproduce binding evidence.
 Illustration extraction. EEBO adds illustration
findability to the un-indexed and caption-less
illustrations in Early English books, by capturing
them as separate numbered images. However,
it does not capture decorative details, such as
decorated initials, small illustrations or decora-
tions, and marginalia. Automated extraction and
the intervention of a scanning operator have
considerable potential for error and distortion.
For example, automated capture routinely mis-
takes unusual text layout or column formatting
for an illustration or a table.
4.6 Page distortion
By digitally preserving EEB page distortions, EEBO
promotes the distortions as an integral part of a
work.
 Page curvature. Pages curve outward from a
distinct V-shape at the center of the top edge
of the ‘open book’ in EEB and EEBO. Lines of
text spread outward and downward like flying
buttresses from the darkness of the centerfold.
The curvature is often so extreme and the gutters
so dark that nearby text is unreadable. We might
D. Kichuk
298 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
therefore forgive a novice reader for concluding
that printers of the period adopted a curved line
standard, with fonts of diminishing size and
progressive ‘squashed’ appearance towards a
black center strip bleeding deeply into the
adjacent white space and sometimes into the text.
 Page flattening. Before cradle technology and the
application of more rigorous microfilm produc-
tion standards, technicians often attempted to
correct page curvature by using manual page-
flattening techniques. EEB has many examples of
technicians using their fingers to pin pages back
in a futile attempt to correct curvature. For
example, STC/864:099 captures two thumbs
pinning down the edges of the lower corners of
the facing pages. EEBO preserves the image
faithfully for the edification of digital archae-
ologists and bibliographers alike.
 Page skew. Print registration is the process of
aligning text blocks to the edge of a sheet of
paper, or graphics or tables within a text. When
the alignment is ‘out of register’, the text block,
graphic, or table appears to be off the square, or
‘skewed’. There are many examples in EEB and
EEBO of registration skew correction or ‘de-
skewing’ by cropping and re-orientation of the
page when microfilming or digitizing, and the
subsequent corruption of bibliographic evidence.
4.7 Microfilm deterioration
At the start of its EEB project, UMI selected cellulose
acetate base film, also known as ‘safety film’, and
later the new more stable and rip-resistant polyester
base film after the mid-1980s. Although acetate base
film was a major improvement over the explosive
nitrate base film that preceded it, it has its own
problems. Acetate is subject to deterioration from
off-gassing caused by acetic acid, sometimes referred
to as the ‘vinegar syndrome’, named after the
pungent smell associated with aging acetate micro-
film collections. Over time, it can shrink, bubble,
tear, and stick together (Baker, 2001). The soft layer
of binding emulsion (gelatin or albumin) and silver
halide compounds used to create the image are
susceptible to both physical and bio-deterioration
(Cappitelli and Sorline, 2005) that corrupt
image information. Even with the best of physical
and bio-controls, EEB master copies on acetate film
would have suffered the same assaults on their
integrity as library distribution copies. UMI’s
microfilm vaults contained similar nasty surprises
and the distinct odor of vinegar. New microfilm
masters generated to remedy such problems as off-
gassing, physical deterioration, and the scourges of
light, humidity and microorganisms, preserved
evidence of past deterioration, that was later
preserved digitally in EEBO.
4.8 Low resolution and loss of detail
Cornell University adopted a minimum of 600 PPI,
1-bit depth standard, as early as 1990 for its digital
and Computer Output Microfilm (COM) project to
preserve its nineteenth and twentieth century brittle
books. It concluded this standard ‘adequately
captures the fine detail, elaborate serifed script,
italics, and small body heights’ that characterize
fonts used in printing between 1850 and 1950. COM
created from digitally scanned images using this
standard met or exceeded the ANSI and Association
for Information and Image Management (ANSI/
AIIM) microfilm standards for image quality and
permanence (Kenney, 1996). The EEBO standard of
400 PPI involves a considerable loss of detail more
appropriate for derivative or access facsimiles of
standard text rather than the fine detail of fonts and
illustrations in Early English books.
4.9 Bi-tonal reduction
The resolution used for the EEB project was too low
for effective grayscale capture, resulting in a bi-tonal
black and white reproduction. According to Gabriel
Egan and John Jowett, digitization reduced the
quality of the evidence further. EEBO scanned the
microfilm as bi-tonal digital images, capturing only
black microfilm dots and stripping out all vestiges of
grayscale with subsequent visible loss of detail
(Jowett and Egan, 2001). While not particularly
noted for color, Early English books do share basic
color characteristics such as ink hue, paper color
and tonal variation, and especially in the incunabula
period, hand-painted frontispieces and illustrations,
and rubrication. Rubrics, or text in red ink, such
as capital letters, signal breaks or headings,
or highlight text. They often mark the beginning
Remediation in Early English Books Online
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007 299
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
or end of a section, acting something like a
paragraph indent for the modern reader. Because
EEB and EEBO capture little tonal variation, they
preserve little evidence of color use. Their bi-tonal
black and white images make rubrics difficult to
identify. Rubrified letters or markings, especially
hand-painted ones appear muddy and indistinct.
Bi-tonal digital reduction of microfilm removes or
distorts evidence of microfilm deterioration, such as
blemishes. A microfilm blemish may be mistaken
for a black blob of unknown origin. Is it a printer’s
error or a blot from an annotator’s pen? The
multiple layers of remediation and deterioration
merge into a single undifferentiated layer, making it
difficult for the digital scholar to distinguish ‘noise’
from information, the influence of the medium,
from ‘real’ evidence. To illustrate how bi-tonal black
and white digital images capture the look of a
printed work differently than color, we can compare
two copies of the same page. The EEBO copy is in
Ranulphus Higden’s Polycronicon, published by
William Caxton in 1482.10 The other is a single
leaf11 posted publicly on the Internet from a small,
digitized collection of incunabula leaves at the
National Diet Library (NDL) in Japan. The copies
appear to be from the same print run. Of the two
copies, the NDL facsimile has more detail and
verisimilitude. It captures the look and feel of an
actual page better than the EEBO version, partly due
to the leaf ’s truer alignment and appearance as a flat
printed page, and to the absence of font, line, and
gutter distortions. More important, the NDL
facsimile is in color. The absence of color in EEBO
makes the text less readable and alters the way the
modern reader experiences the work compared with
the Early English reader. Microfilm (and by
extension digitized microfilm) is not a medium
designed ‘for natural, realistic tonal capture but for
optimal legibility’ (California Digital Library, 2001).
Microfilm is primarily useful as a medium for the
preservation of text.
5 Conclusion
5.1 Pouring old media into new
Delivered with exhilarating speed and ease of access,
the accretion of media layers in EEBO may seem
deceptively light. Bolter and Grusin describe how
some digitized products are presented ‘as if the
content of the older media could simply be poured
into the new one’. The digital medium strives to
‘erase itself ’ in the process. The transparent online
layer introduces no filters or barriers to the old
medium (Bolter and Grusin, 2000). The publisher
represents EEBO to the scholar as if the medium
makes little difference. However, can old media
simply be poured into a new communication
matrix, and re-emerge as itself only better?
Can ‘being digital’ faithfully clone ‘being analog’?
In the process of becoming digital, is the analog
original transformed in fundamental ways that
transcend changes attributable to speed and con-
venience alone?
Marshall McLuhan mused, ‘no medium has its
meaning or existence alone, but only in constant
interplay with other media’ (McLuhan, 2001). The
research for this article suggests that new media
absorbs old media in the process of remediation. In
EEBO, the old communication technologies of
microfilm and print are absorbed within the new
online medium. They do not exist alongside or
separately as perfect facsimiles in a new medium.
There is a measurable loss of qualities unique to the
original medium and a simultaneous gain of
qualities unique to digital media. The process of
remediation transforms content as it filters through
a new medium. The media layers work as distancing
and distorting agents. The scholar, several times
removed from the Early English book when viewing
an image in EEB, increases that distance in EEBO,
and again in EEBO-TCP.
5.2 Text preservation and access
EEBO’s primary importance may be to provide
online access to Early English texts and make them
broadly accessible. It brings primary texts to the
desktop of both scholars and students from an ever-
widening range of disciplines and transforms the
way in which Early English scholars do their
research and teach. Where once only a few scholars
and graduate students had access to the microfilm,
or more rarely, to print copies, access is now
broadly available, even to undergraduates.
Possibilities for cross-disciplinary synergies
D. Kichuk
300 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
are boundless. Online analysis permits new kinds of
research never possible in print or microfilm. In an
instant, a scholar can sift through a wealth of
content that previously might have taken a lifetime
of painstaking, costly effort. EEBO expands the
influence of Early English books far beyond remote,
rare book collections or the narrow confines of
microfilm reading rooms. As Peter White describes
it, EEBO liberates rare texts from the restrictive
cultural framework of ‘the library’ and ‘learning’
(White, 2004).
5.3 Replicating the book
The primary goal of a facsimile is to replicate the look
and feel of the original in addition to the text. How
successful are EEB and EEBO in replicating the Early
English print book, for example, its ‘dimensions,
thickness, page form, and general design style?’
(Landoni et al., 2000). They preserve the text, but
little of the book as a physical object. They present
ambivalent information about key physical character-
istics, such as size, presence, typography, and context.
5.3.1 Dimensions
Neither EEB nor EEBO portray physical size
accurately. Standards for the presentation of scale
or reduction ratios are absent or inconsistently
applied through the long history of EEB microfilm
production. The metadata excludes book dimen-
sions and reduction ratios and since rulers are often
absent, dimensions cannot be determined through
either consulting the image or the bibliographic
record. The absence of reliable dimensions is a
serious barrier to bibliographic scholarship, where
size matters.
5.3.2 Physicality
Details of how pages are gathered, or what sheet
format (folio, quarto, octavo) was used, are not
described in the metadata. Because of low resolution
and cropping, such information is absent or difficult
to garner from visual evidence. There are no
watermark details for the paper and paper mill
scholar. There are no descriptive or visual details
about binding. Both microfilm and digital products
have characteristics that emulate but do not capture
the physicality of print. The distinct physicality of
accessing microfilm bears little resemblance to
opening a print book. For the EEBO user, the
computer, computer monitor, keyboard, and mouse
are the dominant physical presence. The works
themselves are illusive virtual objects, matrices of
light and dark on a screen. It is impossible to handle
them physically or view them three-dimensionally.
5.3.3 Gauging context
In a print book, the reader can gauge context in
relation to the whole work using visual queues. Fore-
edge dimensions (edges opposite the spine) convey
document length and position relative to the
beginning or end, and therefore progress through
the work. Abstract devices such as page numbers
verify and specify the visual and physical sense of
position. Equipped with a page number, or a numeric
position within a reel, and an acquired sense of the
time it takes to slow or fast forward to a targeted
page, the experience of negotiating a work in EEB
bears little resemblance to riffling back and forth
through a print book. In EEB, the absence of fore-
edges and other reliable physical queues makes the
relation of the page to the whole, ambiguous. The
navigation of a work in EEBO bears even less
resemblance to the physicality of a book. Hidden
algorithms, parse a matrix of binary digits, ‘0’ or ‘1’,
and control access. Icons and other navigation links
orient access. Sequential browsing imitates paging
through a work, but the context is abstract and relies
on the reader’s memory. Alternatively, the reader may
skip blithely from one image to another, using
abstract and historical references such as page
number, STC number, and reel number, rather than
physical queues. Without context, the images materi-
alize like objects adrift on a fogged in great digital sea.
5.4 Single source or matrix?
According to a ProQuest spokesperson, the ultimate
goal of EEBO is ‘to provide scholars with a single
source for research on Early English Books, includ-
ing bibliographic citations, full-page representations
of all images, and ASCII-encoded text’ (McLean,
2001). While EEBO provides the latter options and
more, it stops far short of the goal of providing
a ‘one-stop’ research environment and a single
scholarly source for Early English books.
Remediation in Early English Books Online
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007 301
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
At the same time as it promotes EEBO as a single
scholarly source for Early English books (McLean,
2001), ProQuest directs the scholar to also consult
the EEB microfilm facsimile for its higher resolution
images and EEBO-TCP for its full text transcript
and searching capability. ProQuest describes EBBO
as ‘a complement, not a replacement for the
higher resolution images that exist on microfilm’
(Pack, 1999). The microfilm images have greater
fidelity to the original printed works. Libraries,
hoping to provide a scholarly collection of Early
English publications must purchase or retain
existing EEB subscriptions and associated preserva-
tion quality storage, and participate in EEBO-TCP.
Early English scholars will insist on it. Even then, the
quest for completeness is illusive without access to
the original print and manuscript copies.
5.5 The quest for an early english
digital codex
Although improvements in communication tech-
nologies promise to bring the reality of the perfect
‘clone’ facsimile ever closer, is it achievable? Is it
desirable? The cost would be prohibitive. The
remediated digital facsimile cannot overcome its
surrogacy or the incompleteness of absorption of
the old medium. The question is not whether it
needs to do this (does print have to justify that it is
not a manuscript?), but whether publishers and
scholars will openly acknowledge the limits of
remediation, guard against publisher claims of
authenticity and avoid scholarly artifact creation
and misreading. Scholars may be keenly aware of the
limits of remediated primary sources, but it is a
learned awareness. Each generation must rediscover
for itself the limits of new media and interpret how
it affects their research.
EEBO has considerable scholarly value, but it
does not contain identical copies of the original
microfilmed by UMI and certainly not identical
copies of the one pulled from the printing press,
bound, and read when first published. Like the
modern connoisseur of Renaissance paintings who
prefers the darkened and faded colors created by
time and environmental assaults rather than the
vividly colored restoration, the student and scholar
of Early English books runs the risk of revering the
digital image in all its surrogate glory, and
preferring it to the print book it is replicating.
The value of EEB, EEBO, and EEBO-TCP cannot
be understated. Are they the foundation for a true
Early English digital codex, accurately reflecting not
only the text, but the physicality of the original? To
create that paragon, it would be necessary to return
to the original print copy, use new technology
that will not damage or violate the print copy,
and produce 3D and virtual world facsimiles.
The examples of recent digitization projects at The
British Library show progress towards achieving
similitude. According to Oliver Grau, it is just a
matter of years ‘before computing power is available
to realize high-definition spaces of illusion’ (Grau,
2003). The digital codex will become a reality
eventually, while the microfilm and digitized images
will continue to have value as ‘point of view’ images
and as highly processed historical artifacts.
References
Arms, C. R. (1999). Getting the picture: observations
from the library of congress on providing online access
to pictorial images. Library Trends, 48(2): 379–409.
Baker, N. (2001). Double Fold: Libraries and the Assault on
Paper. NY: Random House.
Bolter, J. D. and Grusin, R. (2000). Remediation:
Understanding New Media. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
California Digital Library Technical Architecture
and Standards Workgroup (2001). Best practices
for image capture. http://www.cdlib.org/news/pdf/
BestPracticeImageCapture.pdf
Cappitelli, F. and Sorline, C. (2005). From Papyrus
to compact disc: the microbial deterioration of
documentary heritage. Critical Reviews in
Microbiology, 31(1): 1–10.
Grau, O. (2003). Virtual Art: From Illusion to Immersion.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
JISC: The Joint Information Systems Committee (2004).
Early English books online: the holy grail of
online resources? http://www.jisc.ac.uk/index.cfm?
name¼news_eebo
Jowett, J. and Egan, G. (2001). Review of the Early
English Books Online (EEBO). Interactive Early Modern
Literary Studies, January: 1–13. http://www.shu.ac.uk/
emls/iemls/reviews/jowetteebo.htm.
D. Kichuk
302 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Landoni, M., Wilson, R, and Gibb, F. (2000). From the
visual book to the WEB book: the importance of
design. The Electronic Library, 18(6): 407–19.
Kenney, A. R. (1996). Digital to Microfilm Conversion:
A Demonstration Project: 1994-1996, Final Report to the
National Endowment for the Humanities. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Library, Department of Preservation
and Conservation. http://www.library.cornell.edu/pre
servation/com/comfin.html
McLean, A. J. (2001). Early British printing meets the
electronic age: a large-scale digitization case study.
Microform & Imaging Review, 30(4): 127–134.
McLuhan, M. (2001). Understanding Media: The
Extensions of Man. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Pack, T. (1999). Bringing literature alive: Early English
Books Online reshape research opportunities.
EContent, 22(6): 26–30.
Review - Nicholson Baker, Double Fold: Libraries and
the Assault on Paper (2001). Microform & Imaging
Review, 30(3): 82–98.
Sandler, M. (2003). Academic and commercial
roles in building ‘‘The Digital Library’’.
Collections Management, 28(1/2): 107–119.
Schmitt, J. P. (2003). Early English Books Online.
The Charleston ADVISOR, 4(4), http://www.charles
tonco.com/review.cfm?id¼141
Tanselle, G. T. (2001). Not the real thing. The Times
Literary Supplement, 5134: 14.
Technical Advisory Service for Images (TASI) (2006).
Do Digital Images Exist in the Real World? http://
www.tasi.ac.uk/advice/creating/digitalimage.html.
The Library of Congress [Memory Project] (1997).
Request for proposal for digital images of pictorial
materials. RFP 97-9. http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/
prpsal9/rfp9c.html
Viscomi, J. (2002). Digital facsimiles: reading the william
blake archive. Computers and the Humanities, 36(1): 27–48.
White, P. (2004). Early English Books Online (EEBO).
Presentation at the European University Institute,
Florence. http://www.iue.it/LIB/Guides/History/IUE-
EEBO_files/frame.htm#slide0002.htm
Notes
1 Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org
2 In a ProQuest Company brochure, Early English Books
Online. Available: http://www.proquest.com/products/
pdf/eebo.pdf
3 STC or Short-Title Catalogue of English Books is
comprised of: A Short-Title Catalogue of Books
Printed in England, Scotland, & Ireland and of
English Books Printed Abroad, 1475-1640, compiled by
Alfred W. Pollard and G. R. Redgrave (STC I, Pollard &
Redgrave) (London: Bibliographical Society, 1926; 2nd
edn, 1976–91), and the Short-title Catalogue of Books
Printed in England, Scotland, Ireland, Wales, and British
America and of English Books Printed in Other Countries,
1641-1700, compiled by Donald Goddard Wing (STC
II, Wing) (Modern Language Association of America,
2nd edn, 1982–98).
4 Thomason Tracts is based on a separate catalog of over
22,000 pamphlets, periodicals, and broadsides collected
by George Thomason, a London publisher and
bookseller, during the English Civil War and
Interregnum, 1640–61. The Early English Books Tract
Supplement includes small publications such as broad-
sides and pamphlets, from sixteenth and seventeenth
century Britain, organized and collected in ‘scrapbooks’
or tract volumes located primarily in The British
Library.
5 As of February 2003, EEB included only about 40%
of the titles in the English Short Title Catalogue (ESTC),
a comprehensive index of Early English works pub-
lished in Great Britain and its dependencies between
1473 and 1800. ESTC is a union catalog covering the
Early English collections of over 1,600 libraries world-
wide. It includes shelf marks and location, and
identifies the EEB copy (normally only one).
6 Bit depth, sometimes called ‘brightness resolution’,
defines the palette range of tones or colors of a pixel.
Higher bit depth results in improved preservation
quality with more potential research value over the long
term.
7 In the ProQuest Company brochure, Early English
Books Online. Available at: http://www.umi.com/
products/pdf/eebo.pdf
8 Available at: http://www.bl.uk/onlinegallery/ttp/
ttpbooks.html
9 In Kinki Abenezrah’s, An Everlasting Prognostication of
the Change of Weather: Collected and Compiled for the
Common Vse and Profit of all Country Men, published
in London in 1625 STC (2nd ed.)/62 (microfilm), and
included in EEBO.
10 Ranulf [sic] Higden’s Prolicionycion [sic], printed by
William Caxton in 1482 (STC (2nd ed./13438, Image
312) in EEBO.
11 The same page in another copy of Ranulphus Higden’s
Polycronicon digitized for the Incunabula Collection of
the National Diet Library in Japan. http://
www.ndl.go.jp/incunabula/e/collection/incu_65.html
Remediation in Early English Books Online
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 3, 2007 303
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
