
1 Introduction
The favourite procedure in computational linguis-
tics has always been to investigate linguistic data by
resorting to a probabilistic model essentially based
on frequency measures and the comparison of
observed frequencies with theoretical models of
distribution. The models can vary (e.g. normal law
versus hypergeometric law), the measuring of
the deviations between actually observed facts
and theoretically expected facts can be more or
less complex, but the underlying principle remains
Correspondence:
Michel Juillard, Universite´
de Nice, 98 boulevard E.
Herriot, BP 3209, F 06204
NICE cedex 3.
E-mail:
juillard@unice.fr
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
167
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the same: the texts under scrutiny are assimilated
to a set of unordered elements that are character-
ized only by their presence, their absence, or their
frequency. This of course brings to mind the time-
honoured urn model, which has admittedly done
statistical linguistics some service but labours under
the drawback of considering only the paradigmatic
dimension of the text, the syntagmatic dimension
(with reference either to the overall structure of
the text or to the other forms that make up its
immediate context) being almost totally left out
of account (Saussure 1916).2
Our aim in this article is precisely to go beyond
this early model, in which texts are considered as
mere sets suitable for conventional statistical
processing, by endeavouring to take into account
the shape of the text (in its entirety and in the
parts making it up), i.e. to consider the text as
a topological space. The topology of the text is
defined as the incidence, distribution, and density
of individual linguistic features. The shape of
this space can be analysed qualitatively or quantita-
tively in order to identify the relevant stylistic
features associated with specific authors or
genres. Readers interested in a more mathematical
description of our approach are invited to refer
to Annex 1.
2 A Model for Text Topology
Let us consider a linear structure made up of a set
of individual linguistic events regarded as remark-
able points of the textual chain. Each of these
linguistic events (occurrence of a given word,
of a group, of a grammatical category etc.) can—
indeed must—be considered within its immediate
context, i.e. included in a fragment of text contain-
ing a certain number of words, or, more generally,
of other linguistic events situated before and after it.
Such an interval, defined by an arbitrarily set
number of elements preceding and following point
X (i.e. the occurrence under scrutiny), makes up
a neighbourhood of X. It is of course possible
to modify the size of these intervals, so that to
each point X is made to correspond a family of
neighbourhoods (Barthe´lemy and Luong 1987;
Juillard and Luong 1989; Wittgenstein 1953).
The text is thus composed of a set of occurrences
to which are associated families of neighbourhoods.
It therefore appears that the concept of topological
space supplies a formal framework and a mathe-
matical model for the relatively intuitive notion of
constructed object. For it should be noted that,
like any scientific object, the object in text linguistics
is itself also a construct. No scholar could claim to
be working on strictly raw data, were it only because
he selects his object among an infinity of possibil-
ities according to his interests and the requirements
of his research.
2.1 The model
A topological space—like any text of some
dimension—is a complex structure which is difficult
to control and apprehend in its entirety. We
propose to build a model (Fig. 1) making possible
the local characterizations of the neighbourhoods
and to supply for it a numerical function which is
an image—albeit reduced—of our space. The
operation of the model requires the development
of a computerized procedure implementing the
man-machine dialogue.
Let us call L the linguistic object to be studied
in text T by means of one or several questions Q.
Question Q asked about L is translated into
a relevant question Qloc, a local as opposed to a
global question, bearing on a neighbourhood of
a point m of text T.3 For example, in the study of
a Latin corpus, a global question Q would typically
be: «What is the normal verbal context of an
occurrence of the narrative present, in other words
can a single instance of the narrative present occur
among the past tenses or does it have to appear as
an element in a series?». The associated local
question Qloc would then become: «Given a single
occurrence of the narrative present in the text, how
many other instances of the narrative present and
how many instances of the simple past will turn up
in its neighbourhood?». The question is asked by
means of a computer procedure which returns a
numerical answer recorded as rlocm . By causing m to
vary over the whole of T or a subset U of T, one
obtains a set of answers {rlocm }m2U. It is then
X. Luong et al.
168 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
possible to produce a graph displaying a cloud of
points each of which represents a local answer.
This provides the scholar with the representation
of a numerical function called global function.
This figure can be used to outline and quantify
certain properties of the topological space in hand.
This function can then, by feedback effect, modify L
and give rise to a new question Q0.
Several types of selections and constructions
can be envisaged. The initial choice to perform is
that of the linguistic parameters considered as
characteristic of the form under scrutiny. In the
case of a French language corpus it could be one
or several lexical items (immigre´s, immigration,
e´trangers, migrants; or all the adverbs ending in
-ment), a whole grammatical category (verbal tense
for instance), a given syntactic structure (the relative
clause for instance), etc.4 Next comes the choice of
the suitable ‘focal length’ or zoom level: from the
widest to the narrowest angle. This choice will result
in observing alternately the distribution of relevant
parameters over the whole text (even distribution as
the text proceeds or on the contrary occurrences in
batches or bursts, homogeneous distribution over
the various parts of the text versus occurrences
figuring only in certain parts such as for example the
introduction and the conclusion) or the locations
in the text where special sequences occur (for
instance narrative sequences made up of at least
five successive occurrences of the passe´ simple or
simple past). These standard examples make it
necessary to specify notions of neighbourhood size
and neighbourhood assessment.
2.2 Neighbourhood assessment
Let us consider as our object of study a text reduced
to the sole sequence of its verbal forms,
more precisely the succession of the verbal tenses
lending it structure. This corresponds to a generally
significant and characteristic form. Thus, to echo
the now well-established distinction drawn by
Emile Benveniste (1966/1974) between discourse
and history, such a form as:
[IMP. IMP. PQP. IMP. IMP. PS. IMP. PS. PS. PS. IMP. PQP. PS.
PS. PS. PS. PS.]5
will pertain to history and refer to an initial
introductory section probably setting the frame
Fig. 1 The model
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 169
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of the events reported followed by a narrative
passage in the simple past, whereas a struc-
ture restricted to the alternation between
occurrences of the simple present and occurrences
of the passe´ compose´, interspersed with a
few representatives of the imperfect or the future,
such as
[PST. PST. PC. PST. PST. IMP. PST. PST. PC. PC. PST. PST. FUT.
PST. PST.]6
is obviously evocative of discourse. In the actuality
of real corpora, discourse and history are often
intermingled to give rise to complex forms. Within
the framework of historic narrative roughly
outlined in the former of the above sequences
each element of the textual form under scrutiny can
be characterized by a fairly narrow neighbourhood,
for instance of size 5 and by a measure of
this neighbourhood represented by the number
of occurrences of the items in hand (here the
descriptive tenses). Such a measure can remain basic
by considering only occurrences of the imperfect.
It can also be made more complex by taking
into account the presence of occurrences of the
pluperfect considered as equivalent of the imperfect
for their descriptive potential, but also occurrences
of participles in apposition or of certain subordi-
nate clauses that would then have to be included
in the chain and whose part in the measure could
be weighted.
It appears that the properties of a neighbour-
hood are extremely interesting for the analysis and
modelization of textual forms. Firstly, as neighbour-
hood size is arbitrary, hence variable, the scholar
can begin working within a suitably narrow and
linguistically relevant neighbourhood base (for
instance the sentence) and then move on to a
wider neighbourhood base, should the need arise
(rarity of the phenomena investigated, necessity
to handle significant units larger than the sentence,
etc.). Secondly, a given neighbourhood can be
characterized in two ways, both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Several descriptors can be associated,
so that the quality measure of the neighbourhood
may depend on relatively complex properties
that will ultimately account for the richness of
the underlying text.
2.3 The global function
When processing is completed, each constitu-
tive element of the textual structure finds itself
associated with a numerical value representing the
measure of neighbourhood. The linear chain of
linguistic data can then be visualized as the sequence
of the corresponding numerical values and be the
object of various mathematical calculations, e.g. the
automatic segmentation of the chain into different
subsets, the union of subsets, automatic classifica-
tion, comparison of graphs representing these
numerical series, insertion into matrices for the
calculation of distances, etc. Potential linguistic
applications are many: automatic structuring of
texts, automatic classification, comparisons for
typological purposes, characterization of subsets
of close texts with a view to evaluating genre,
sub-genre, or more simply authorial style.
But it is to be noted that the structuring
and classification of texts is not the only possible
object of this method of research. The topological
representation of linguistic events and the model
that we have just introduced also make possible
an evaluation of linguistic facts themselves. Instead
of being aimed at individualizing sections of the
corpus, the research will then be focused on
the specific distributions and the characteristic
neighbourhoods of various items suitable for
comparison. We supply an illustration below at
paragraph 3.1.1.2.
The operative feature here is to be able to create
from the same initial text as many scientific
objects as is deemed necessary. The scholar is free
to elaborate several global functions in order to
account for the various properties of a family
of neighbourhoods depending on the aims of
his research. Thus, by projection on the axis of
values associated to the function, he can produce
several images of the topological space in hand,
which can then be superposed and compared. Some
of the properties selected and some of the spaces
constructed may subsequently turn out to be of
little interest. This is a very minor drawback easily
offset by the analytical potential of the method
since the procedure is by and large fully automa-
tized and based on a modular platform for
X. Luong et al.
170 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
processing machine-readable, grammatically-tagged
texts, and easy to handle algorithmic calculations.
2.4 Computerization of the model
The model is implemented by means of a platform,
developed in Sun’s Java language, from which
several independent modules can be operated.
Each of them can be directly controlled in order
to perform a specific task. Here are a few examples
of modules ready for use in our platform:
(1) storing in the central memory of the textual
data, tagged or untagged, with the possibility
of displaying the text on screen;
(2) reduction of the text to the sequence of tags
pertinent to the exploitation in hand;
(3) use of set-theory operators: construction of
a set, an intersection, a union, a difference
etc . . . ;
(4) current statistical treatments;
(5) storing of results in specific files.
The questions that we ask are varied and
diversified. Each of these questions is associated
with a central module integrating the treatment
procedures of the local neighbourhoods. We thus
obtain the global function. This module is inte-
grated into the existing environment and will
require only a very limited number of computer
codes and instructions.
3 A Few Applications
The following examples will illustrate the advantages
of the method described above and give an idea
of the range and variety of its fields of application.
Some of them are part of more general ongoing
research and have already yielded satisfactory results
in the stylistic and generic characterization of texts;
others have been developed here as illustrations of
the method and have served no other particular
purpose so far.
With one exception, these examples all have
in common to address grammatical parameters,
i.e. build a topological textual structure from the
distributions of various grammatical categories
concerning the verb (tense, mood, etc.).
This implies the use of lemmatized corpora tagged
with sufficient delicacy and reliability in the field
of morphosyntax. One of them is the corpus of
Latin texts encoded by the LASLA (Laboratoire
d’Analyse Statistique des Langues Anciennes de
l’Universite´ de Lie`ge), another is the LOB corpus,
no doubt better known to the English-speaking
reader.
3.1 Local topological analysis
This initial stage of our research takes into account
distribution phenomena at the micro-structural
level, e.g. the recurrence of certain syntagmatic
chains or the coexistence of certain linguistic items.
Thus D. Longre´e and X. Luong have shown that the
use of sequences of variable length of verbs in
the perfect or the imperfect was the ideal stylistic
discriminant for each of the Latin historians
represented in the LASLA corpus (Longre´e and
Luong 2003; Longre´e 2005). Some authors, it
appears, prefer to proceed by means of descriptive
‘bundles’ of verbs in the imperfect alternating
with narrative ‘bundles’ in the perfect, while
others resort to single occurrences of both tenses
at regular and fairly close intervals. The corpus of
English texts will be used to study the distributions
and mutual relationships of respectively F and
n forms of the verb in various text categories.
3.1.1 Sequences of finite and non-finite verbal
forms
If one considers a text from the point of view of
its syntagmatic, as opposed to its paradigmatic,
dimension, it can be viewed as a sequence of
entities or forms representing various grammat-
ical categories or syntactic classes (Saussure 1916).
Among these entities the verb is one of the most
frequent and most interesting on account of the
variety of its forms and the crucial part they play
in sentence organization. Occurrences of verbs are
characterized by bound morphological markers or
free neighbouring morphemes coding person,
number, mood, tense, and aspect, as well as
certain transformations (e.g. the passive). It has
seemed interesting and worthwhile to apply our
model of text topology to the various materializa-
tions in texts of the opposition between F and n
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 171
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
forms of the verb, i.e. to examine the various
neighbourhoods where they coexist, forming
sequences or strings in the strictest sense, without
any intervening foreign element as may be the
case with ‘rafales’ or bursts (see below 3.1.2). The
implementation of the model will result in a
topological map or chart figuring the way in
which these forms are distributed within the space
of the text. Before further describing our
implementation of the model, it has been
deemed necessary, particularly for the non-linguist
reader, to introduce briefly the underlying notions
of finiteness and non-finiteness.
3.1.1.1 Finite versus non-finite
Finite forms of the verb are those forms marked
for tense (present, past), mood (indicative, sub-
junctive, imperative), person (first, second, third),
and number (singular versus plural, more generally
concord with the subject).
Non-finite verb forms are the forms bearing
none of the marks listed above, i.e. the infinitive,
the present participle, the past participle, and the
gerund.7
In theory, both F and n verb forms can occur
individually as sole exponents of the simple verb
phrase:
He runs daily. (F)
Running daily will keep him fit. (n)
In actual texts occurrences of F forms are
often associated with n forms in complex verbal
groups where the obligatory element or head8 is
typically a F form of the verb. There is a practical
limit to the theoretical number of n forms
that can be carried by an initial F form.
R. Quirk illustrates this limit with the following
complex string (ibid., p. 154):
They must have been expected to have been being
paid well.
The sequence of verbal forms can be symbolized as
Fnnnnnnn where F¼ finite and n¼ non-finite.
The cohesion, the consistency, and the great
linguistic delicacy of the principles that governed
the tagging of the LOB corpus made it relatively
easy to distinguish between F and n forms in the
samples selected for this topological exploration.9
3.1.1.2 Some results
The model makes it possible to embrace at one
glance the way in which the forms under scrutiny
occupy the space of the text. Figure 2 is a fraction
of what we call the topological chart of the text.
The whole chart gives an overall visual representa-
tion of the relative density, as single occurrences or
in strings, of F and n forms in the section of the
corpus being explored.
Linguists, particularly stylisticians, will favour
both a more compendious and comprehensive view
of the results as they are naturally interested first
and foremost in the way in which all the F and n
forms are combined in the verbal groups of the
actual texts
The model makes it possible to identify, classify,
and count all the syntagmatic chains made up of any
number of F and n. Table 1 supplies the identities
and the number of occurrences of these various
strings in subsections of 10 or 20 samples of
different categories or genres in the LOB corpus.10
The fact that no real language text of some length
can exist without conjugated verbs is reflected in
the relative stability of the numbers of single
occurrences of F. There are however some striking
variations in these absolute frequencies of single
F forms. The inflected verbal units are twice as
frequent in the corpus samples of mystery and
detective fiction (C45) and of romance and love
story (C53). This predominance of single F forms as
exponents of the verbal group is offset by the
relative rarity of long strings concatenating expo-
nents of F and n. Both characteristics can be
considered as stylistic features of the language
varieties in hand. The texts in our selection show-
ing the greatest complexity and variety in F/n strings
are press texts, both reportage (C01,C02, C03)
and editorials (C4, C7, C8) as well as scientific
texts (C35 and C36), miscellaneous: government
documents and foundation or industry reports
(C31 and C32). The insistent frequency of F forms
in some samples is a sign of the explicit presence of
the subject in certain corpus genres or varieties
where dialogue and narrative predominate.
X. Luong et al.
172 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Conversely, given the constraints of language
cohesion, the relative rarity of F-forms almost
invariably points to strictly referential or speculative
prose with low language-user involvement and a
high frequency of the third person and the passive
in longer than average sentences.11
Even if our approach is not strictly probabilistic
it must be owned that some of the strings are
intriguing on several counts, particularly their
length and the simultaneous presence of several
exponents of F.
The implementation of the model makes it
possible to extract and visualize the natural language
counterparts of these sequences in F and n.
Sequences of several F forms of the type FFF . . . F
correspond to enumerations of full verbs in the
same tense or under the dominance of the same
modal.12 More challenging at first sight are those
sequences of more than one n element headed by a
single F form that ultimately illustrate the dominant
role of the passive voice in certain varieties or
registers. As an example, here are the textual
counterparts of the six occurrences of the string
Fnnn in subset C17 (popular lore):
opportunity has (F) been (n) taken (n) to revise (n)
the course . . .
a man had been seen fleeing from Vauxhall
station . . .
a man had been seen leaving the train at
Wandsworth . . .
it has been noticed to possess another graphic
name . . .
Fig. 2 Topological chart (extract)
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 173
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Table 1 Distribution of F/n strings in the corpus
C01 C7 C8 C17 C31 C32 P01
F 1426 F 1310 F 979 F 1391 F 1158 F 874 F 4667
FF 8 FF 10 FF 9 FF 10 FF 13 FF 6 FF 48
FFn 1 FFn 3 FFF 1 FFn 4 FFF 1 Fn 308 FFn 11
Fn 314 Fn 338 Fn 230 Fn 351 FFn 1 FnF 3 Fn 965
FnF 5 FnF 1 FnF 1 FnFn 1 Fn 316 FnFn 1 FnF 3
Fnn 62 FnFn 1 Fnn 45 Fnn 51 FnF 3 Fnn 75 FnFn 1
FnnF 1 Fnn 61 FnnF 2 FnnF 1 Fnn 61 Fnnn 6 Fnn 119
Fnnn 2 FnnF 1 Fnnn 4 Fnnn 6 Fnnn 3 n 653 Fnnn 5
FnnFn 1 nF 6 n 1338
Fnnn 3 nFn 2 nF 2
n 610 n 629 n 473 n 713 n 711 nFnn 2 nn 126
nF 1 nF 4 nF 3 nF 8 nF 4 nn 125 nnn 12
nFn 1 nFn 1 nn 65 nFn 3 nFn 1 nnF 1
nn 86 nn 109 nnF 1 nFnn 1 nn 123 nnFnn 1
nnn 5 nnF 1 nnn 9 nn 70 nnn 8 nnn 7
nnn 12 nnn 3 nnnnn 1
C35 C36 C45 C53 C02 C03 C04
F 1319 F 1079 F 2333 F 2290 F 1337 F 1455 F 1372
FF 14 FF 7 FF 20 FF 12 FF 13 FF 10 FF 10
FFn 1 FFF 1 FFn 3 FFn 3 FFn 1 FFn 1 FFn 1
Fn 279 FFn 1 Fn 486 FFnn 1 FFnn 1 FFnn 1 Fn 352
FnF 5 Fn 323 FnF 2 Fn 393 Fn 356 Fn 313 FnF 3
FnFnn 1 FnF 3 FnFn 1 FnF 2 FnF 2 FnF 1 Fnn 81
Fnn 51 Fnn 43 Fnn 80 Fnn 52 FnFn 2 FnFn 1 FnnF 1
Fnnn 1 Fnnn 3 Fnnn 2 Fnnn 1 FnFnn 1 Fnn 61 Fnnn 5
Fnn 68 Fnnn 3
n 569 n 585 n 592 n 479 Fnnn 4 n 595 n 566
nF 6 nF 4 nF 2 nF 3 n 589 nF 6 nF 4
nn 82 nFn 3 nn 50 nn 36 nF 8 nn 64 nn 66
nnF 1 nn 96 nnn 2 nFnn 1 nnF 1 nnn 4
nnFn 2 nnF 2 nn 101 nnn 6
nnn 9 nnn 4 nnn 8 nnnn
D01 E01 A02 H11 N01 K01 G51
F 2751 F 2677 F 2827 F 2032 F 4642 F 4481 F 2577
FF 21 FF 28 FF 20 FF 19 FF 45 FF 49 FF 34
FFn 4 FFn 1 FFn 2 FFF 1 FFF 1 FFn 5 FFF 1
FFnn 1 Fn 622 FFnn 1 FFFFFFFFF FFn 3 Fn 860 FFn 5
Fn 584 FnF 6 Fn 665 FFn 1 FFnn 1 FnF 1 Fn 593
FnF 5 Fnn 91 FnF 4 Fn 624 Fn 888 Fnn 113 FnF 6
FnFF 1 Fnnn 4 FnFn 1 FnF 6 FnF 5 FnnFF 1 FnFnnn 1
Fnn 73 n 1421 Fnn 142 FnFn 1 FnFn 1 Fnnn 1 Fnn 119
FnnF 1 nF 15 FnnF 1 Fnn 136 Fnn 123 n 1381 FnnF 1
Fnnn 2 nFn 4 Fnnn 8 Fnnn 9 FnnF 1 nF 9 FnnFnnn 1
n 1065 nn 212 n 1162 n 1364 Fnnn 4 nn 98 Fnnn 7
nF 2 nnF 1 nF 10 nF 10 n 1248 nnF 1 n 1287
nFn 3 nnn 17 nn 130 nFn 3 nF 6 nnn 4 nF 9
nn 157 nnnn nnF 1 nFnn 2 nn 99 nn 165
nnF 1 nnn 10 nn 248 nnFn 1 nnF 2
nnn 9 nnnn nnF 1 nnn 6 nnFn 1
nnFnn 1 nnn 10
nnn 15
nnnnn
174 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
would have been used to weigh bales of wool . . .
organisers have been asked to take up the
question . . .
The presence of several F forms in any given string
corresponds most of the time to a case of
embedding. Thus the sequence FnnFn in C7
(press editorials) points to a relative clause
embedded as complement of the subject of a verb
in the passive:13
the publicity with which the scheme has (F) been
(n) launched (n) has (F) made (n) much of the
gaiety . . .
Such sequences, even though they are not men-
tioned in standard grammars, are no exceptions,
as is proved by the following FnFnn examples
(respectively C02, press reportage and C35,
learned and scientific writing), which represent
slight variations on the structure of the
previous item:
the new air force which president Tshombe is (F)
forming (n) have (F) been (n) delivered (n) to
Elizabethville . . .
the amount it is (F) displaced (n) is (F) said (n) to
depend (n) upon the distance separating . . .
These complex multiple sequences are not the
preserve of highly specialized registers of contem-
porary English; they can be shown to occur in
still more elaborate guises in texts aimed at a
fairly large public, as is the case with our last two
examples culled from the Belles lettres section of
the corpus:
proved that his wife from whom he was (F)
separated (n) had (F) been (n) summoned (n) to
give (n) evidence against him . . .
the amount of discovery and inquiry with which he
has (F) been (n) surrounded (n) has (F) been (n)
intended (n) to stimulate (n) his curiosity . . .
These examples illustrate the reliability and versa-
tility of our model for the topological exploration
of texts. The results are interesting in themselves,
they also shed light on the structure of the verbal
group in actual English texts and could ultimately
serve as a basis for selecting and ordering elements
of a new grammar of the English verb in use.
3.1.2 Distribution in ‘rafales’ or bursts
If one is interested in the distribution of various
items along a text, it is easy to realize that some
of them evince a fairly regular distribution while
others seem to occur in batches or ‘rafales’ to
borrow Pierre Lafon’s felicitous image. ‘Rafales’ are
distinct from sequences or chains in that they do
not imply the immediate succession of the items
under consideration; thus three contiguous imper-
fects in the succession of the verbal tenses making
up a text form a sequence whereas the presence
of three, four, or five imperfects that are not
necessarily contiguous in a segment of text includ-
ing ten verbal forms will make up a ‘rafale’ provided
the overall density of imperfects is lower.
The notion of ‘rafale’ was first used by Pierre
Lafon in the study of lexical items in order to
spot changes of theme within a text (Lafon 1981).
When a word has a highly informative semantic load,
this type of distribution is by and large linked with
the thematic progression of the text. Conversely, in
the case of more neutral, non-descript words, this
distributional phenomenon can point to less super-
ficial linguistic features linked either with the
author’s style or with some intrinsic properties of
the item in hand. In both cases a close look at the
distributions can yield information reaching well
below the surface of the text.
Such was the hypothesis that we formulated a few
years ago concerning the latin verb coepi ‘begin/start
to’. Philologists have as a matter of fact suspected
this verb of starting to develop into an auxiliary
without ever achieving the full transformation.
In certain texts it does work as an inchoative
auxiliary but it has left no traces in romance
languages. Besides, some authors use it so frequently
that it has been described as a ‘language tic’. It has
seemed to us that the notion of ‘rafale’ might well
lend scientific content to the purely intuitive one
of ‘verbal tic’ or ‘mannerism’. The actual results
of our study, published in 1995, seemed rather
conclusive.
That was the reason why we thought that we
could devote part of the present methodological
study to a comparison of the distributional
regularities or irregularities of a certain number
of verbs in various Latin texts, the aims being to
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 175
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
test the stability of this distribution in the texts and
to compare the behaviour of the different verbs in
order to assess if a verb’s behaviour is a reflection
of its semantic status.
The method is implemented in the following
fashion: the texts having been lemmatized, the
textual object under study is an ordered sequence
of lemmas, in other words dictionary entries as
opposed to graphic forms. One then places over
this linear chain a window which is 101 unit wide
and centred on the verb whose distribution is
being examined. The window thus has a span of
50 units before and 50 units after the hinge or
pivot verb. After counting the number of
occurrences of the given verb encompassed by
the window, one moves the window so that it is
centred on the next occurrence of the verb that
has not yet been counted, i.e. that was not within
the ambit of the previous window. After moving
the window in this way over the totality of
the text, the results are assessed by calculating the
number of windows containing respectively one
occurrence, two occurrences, and three occur-
rences of the pivot verb. A three-term character-
ization of the verb is thus obtained; the third
figure is weighted by a factor of value 2 as it is
obvious that ‘rafales’ or bursts of three or more
occurrences are more significant and must conse-
quently be given more importance in the analysis.
The procedure is repeated for the 24 verbs in
the corpus that are most frequent and so can
be considered as part of its basic vocabulary.
The process yielded a matrix of 24 lines
by 3 columns for the first text used (Petronius’
Satyricon). Here is a tree-analysis representing the
similarities and dissimilarities of 24 verbs as well
as the individual figures for the three parameters
of the verbs situated on the most outlying
branches (Fig. 3). In order to keep this presenta-
tion within reasonable limits, we only supply here
the most characteristic data, namely the four verbs
occurring most frequently in bursts (or rafales)
and the three verbs occurring with a more even
distribution.
Facio (‘do’): 93 – 36 – 58 Ago (‘lead, drive’): 34 – 4 – 0
Habeo (‘have’): 80 – 26 – 50 Debeo (‘must, owe’): 19 – 2 – 0
Possum (‘can’): 62 – 10 – 21 Peto (‘seek, claim’): 23 – 2 – 0
Inquio (‘say’): 97 – 64 – 61
This tree representation calls for a few
comments:
(1) the verbs hanging from the same branch at
the bottom of the figure are characterized
quantitatively by their high frequency of use
(which of course goes some way to account
for their occurrences in bursts or ‘rafales’: the
higher the frequency of a given item the more
likely its occurring in bundles) and semanti-
cally by their relative neutrality: they are not
tool-verbs properly so-called but nearly all
of them can be described as prop-verbs or
support verbs: facio ‘do’, habeo ‘have’, inquio
‘I say, he says’ (introducing reported speech),
possum ‘can’.
Fig. 3 PETRONIUS, Satyricon: occurrences in ‘rafales’or
bursts of the 24 most frequent verbs (with weighting by
two of the third factor)
X. Luong et al.
176 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(2) The top end of the tree is occupied by
verbs with more definite, albeit sometimes
polysemic, lexical content: ago ‘do, drive,
lead’, peto ‘seek, ask, claim’, debeo ‘must,
owe’, scio ‘know’; one also notices the very
close proximity of complementary lexemes:
do ‘give’ and accipio ‘receive’.
(3) The middle of the tree brings together a set of
various verbs for which we shall offer no other
comment except that this part of the tree is
occupied by a few modal (volo ‘will’, nolo
‘will not’) or aspectual auxiliaries (coepio ‘start
to’, soleo ‘be wont to’); such verbs are not
among those occurring mostly in ‘rafales’
or bursts.
Let us now look at the distribution of the same
verbs in other texts of approximately the same
period (those of the previous 24 verbs with too few
occurrences have been disregarded, but tree-analysis
is sufficiently stable to overcome the hazard of a few
missing data14 Fig. 4).
As the comparison between the texts proceeds,
it becomes conspicuous that two of the verbs
evince an invariably irregular distribution, with
occurrences in bursts. They are the two basic verbs
dico ‘say’ and facio ‘do’, closely followed by habeo
‘have’ and video ‘see’. These are opposed to the
verbs already pointed to in Petronius: soleo ‘be wont
to’, followed by scio ‘know’, ago ‘lead, drive’,
venio ‘come’ and peto ‘ask, claim’.
The unvarying positioning of verb ago makes
it necessary not to consider it as a support or
prop verb, in spite of its polysemy and its ability to
become part of stock phrases such as gratias agere
‘thank’. That is a somewhat unexpected finding
which forces one to distinguish those support verbs
that are totally free, being available for frequent
repetitions, and those that go into stock phrases and
as a consequence become less available for undiffer-
entiated multipurpose uses.
The next remark concerns the various auxiliaries
in the list. As was already suggested by the Petronius
text, these verbs do not behave in the same way:
possum ‘can’ is not averse to distribution in ‘rafales’
or bursts; debeo ‘must, owe’ hardly ever occurs in
fits and starts, except with Pliny; volo ‘will, want’ is
more versatile from author to author.
Lastly, the distribution of some verbs is totally
heterogeneous; this is particularly the case with puto
‘think’, and with do ‘give’, fio ‘become’, and fero
‘carry, bear’. In this case, only by returning to the
actual texts will one be able to ascertain whether or
not the observed variations are due to thematic
divergences between the works; one might for
instance expect a philosophical treatise on generos-
ity to give pride of place to verb do ‘give’ and afford
it the opportunity to appear in ‘rafales’ or bursts
in certain passages, which will be precluded in a
text on another subject. And, in actual fact, the
tree-diagram of Seneca’s de Beneficiis—albeit poorly
structured and difficult to interpret—places verbs
do ‘give’ and accipio ‘receive’ at the very end of the
branch bearing items with occurrences in bursts,
a situation where they swap places with facio ‘do’
or dico ‘say’. These thematic motivations have
already been explored by P. Lafon.
The method presented here succeeds in high-
lighting different behaviours for each of the verbs
considered and some of these behaviours are
perfectly characteristic. Another territory seems to
be worth exploring: would this type of analysis,
if applied to a larger body of texts, bring out
generic affinities? One may indeed think that
certain types of texts will regularly favour, or on
the contrary avoid, neutral, non-descript verbs
such as ‘do’ and ‘say’ while certain authors or
certain types of texts will use as a neutral verb,
with possible distribution in bursts, a verb with by
and large versatile behaviour like ‘become’.
3.2 Global topological analysis
Another type of topological approach consists in
widening the field of investigation in order to
encompass the macro-structural phenomena that
control the distribution over the whole text of the
linguistic features chosen as analytical parameters
(Lamalle and Salem 2002; Luong and Mellet 1915,
2003; Salem 2002). It can therefore prove interesting
and productive for instance to analyze the distribu-
tion of a given grammatical category throughout
a text and to assess whether its occurrences are
evenly distributed or concentrated only in the intro-
duction and the conclusion; then to wonder if the
phenomenon is characteristic only of the one text or
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 177
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
PLINY, Panegyric on Trajan
Fig. 4 The 24 verbs in Pliny, Seneca, and Petronius
X. Luong et al.
178 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
if it can be common to other texts of the same
author, the same genre, etc . . .We will introduce
two methods of analysis applied to Latin texts.
3.2.1 Using segments of texts
The distribution of a linguistic feature over a text
can be studied by means of graphs. Yet, such
graphs are difficult to exploit (Longre´e 2003;
Longre´e et al. 2004) as there is no reliable method
for comparing curves of different lengths. It is
therefore necessary to revert to less qualitative
methods and use tables of numerical data in order
to calculate distances.
Such tables are obtained by dividing all the texts
into the same number of segments. The problem
of length is crucial. One cannot work with fixed
spans of text as the number of columns correspond-
ing to the profiles of the different texts would vary
with their size. A text containing 300 main verbs
and another containing 350 would respectively,
yield profiles of 30 and 35 ten-verb segments. Using
‘natural segments’ (introduction, narrative, conclu-
sion) cannot be envisaged either, except perhaps in
the case of certain varieties (folk tales, directions for
use, scientific reports) as this might introduce part
of the sought answer into the very question. Besides,
application to poorly structured texts would prove
difficult.
The only practicable method consists in dividing
the texts into the same number of contiguous
segments. The method was tested with regard to
the variable frequency of verbal tenses within text
types, according to whether the dominant mode is
Benveniste’s history or discourse. In a Latin narra-
tive, descriptive elements are typically in the imper-
fect or pluperfect whereas the historic framework
requires the perfect or preterit. The distribution of
these items in a given text should characterize the
structure of its narrative, the underlying hypothesis
being that, since the choice of tenses underpins the
narrative structure, their overall distribution can be
the mark of the in-depth organization of the text, a
kind of format conditioned by the genre or sub-genre
of the literary work in hand. Should this assumption
be correct, one can expect that texts with similar
profiles will be brought together not only on the basis
of style or period criteria but also on account of
generic affinities.
This working hypothesis was tested with a corpus
of Latin history texts, reduced to roughly equal
(variation factor 1.2) sequences of main-clause
verbs (Longre´e et al. 2004; Longre´e and Mellet
2006). The problem was to find the segmentation
that would best serve to characterize their profiles,
thus making comparisons possible.
The texts were successively divided into varying
numbers of segments (20, 16, 12, 8, 6, and finally
5 segments). The aim was to find the best fit, i.e. the
division yielding the best results in terms of profile
definition. Each of the obtained profile matrices
was chi-square tested and graphically represented by
a tree-diagram. The outcome of successive trials was
that a wide-span segmentation into 5 slices yielded
the most satisfactory results (Fig. 5).
The clusters appearing on the tree are particu-
larly revealing in that they bring together all the
texts pertaining to the sub-genre of biography which
are opposed to all the other texts (see Annex 2),
for which the clustering is looser and somewhat
expected (proximity of books 14 and 15 of Tacitus’
Annals, fairly close proximity between Caesar’s
De Bello Gallico and Civil War, atypical character
of De Bello Hispanico, distant from all others and
loosely connected to the structure). The sub-genre
criterion is potent enough to place Tacitus’ Life
of Agricola alongside the other biographies, genre
taking precedence over the writer’s style and
personality.
Besides, the results are obtained with a relatively
small number of segments, which means that
the operative factor in terms of similarity or
dissimilarity between texts is their division into
large segments corresponding to the structure of the
narrative. This is made very conspicuous in
the histograms for the numbers of occurrences
of the perfect in each of the five segments of the
texts being investigated.
The graphs for the two biographies of the corpus
(Tac_Agricola and Suet_Iulius) (Fig. 6) show a
gradual decline of the perfect in the first four parts
of the text and a rise in the final part. The profile
of book 15 of Annals is almost symmetrical, with
an increase of perfects up to the middle of the text,
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 179
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
followed by a decline in the fourth and fifth
parts. The profile of Book 5 of De Bello Gallico is
admittedly different from that of book 15 of
Annals but it is even more different from that
of the two biographies.
Dividing the texts into five segments makes
it possible to test certain linguistic parameters in
terms of their relevance to the texts’ overall
structures. One can for instance use the same
corpus and the same strings of verbal tags for a
new analysis of the same type but taking as
its criteria the distribution of imperfects and
pluperfects, the descriptive tenses (Fig. 7). This
distribution might be expected to be
 
Fig. 5 Distribution of perfects in main clauses (5-segment method)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5Fr
eq
ue
nc
ie
s 
of
 th
e 
pe
rfe
ct
Fr
eq
ue
nc
ie
s 
of
 th
e 
pe
rfe
ct
Taci_Agricola
0
20
40
60
80
100
Fr
eq
ue
nc
ie
s 
of
 th
e 
pe
rfe
ct
Fr
eq
ue
nc
ie
s 
of
 th
e 
pe
rfe
ct
0
10
20
30
40
50
Cés_Gall5
0
20
40
60
80
Tac_Ann 15
Taci_Agricola
Text segments Text segments
Caes_BGall 05
Suet_Iulius
Text segments
Suet_Iulius
Text segments
Tac_Ann 15
Fig. 6 Histograms for the perfect
X. Luong et al.
180 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
complementary to that of the perfect, the narrative
tense par excellence. Using the same method to
calculate distances between texts shows that this is
not the case at all.
Not many clusters bring together works by the
same author or belonging to the same genre.
Curtius_03 and Suet_Iulius stick together, as well
as Suet_Tiberius and Tac_Agricola, but at opposite
ends of the trees. TacAnn_14 and TacAnn_15,
the two books of Tacitus’ Annals that were close
to each other in the previous figure now hang
from two relatively distant branches. The distribu-
tions of imperfects and pluperfects in the five
segments of the texts then fail to account for
structure and narrative organization. This state of
affairs is easily accounted for: the descriptive or
background elements are not concentrated solely
in main clauses; they are also well represented in
subordinate clauses. One should bear in mind that
the distances were calculated with reference to
main-clause verbs, which entails a loss of informa-
tion. This loss is more important in the case of
descriptive tenses than in the case of narrative
tenses. Besides, it stands to reason that the profile
of a story should coincide with its narrative
framework and that such frameworks should be
comparable in texts of the same genre, with
descriptive passages more freely distributed over
the corresponding structure. Other relevant linguis-
tic features might also be investigated with the
method just described.
There is of course room for improvement.
One would for instance need to assess the influence
of text size beyond the 1.2 variation factor enforced
here. This could be achieved by adding to the
corpus a number of shorter or longer texts. One
would also have to question the pertinence of
dividing each text into five segments. Lastly, one
would have to tackle the prickly problem of
representing the whole text by the sequence of its
main-clause verbs. Working with additional gram-
matical categories, or indeed with the totality of
them, might prove worthwhile and perhaps lead to
revaluation of the results in hand.15
3.2.2 Assessing neighbourhood
The method, as we know (cf. Section 2.2), consists
in associating each unit of a text with a measure
of its neighbourhood in terms of a property of
this neighbourhood considered as relevant. As was
the case for slices, the size of the neighbourhood
is perfectly arbitrary. We chose to work on the
sequences of tags defining the various verbal
tenses in the main clauses of the texts. We opted
for a neighbourhood size of 11 in which the
property investigated is the presence of the indica-
tive perfect, the basic narrative tense. For each unit
of the text, a programme examines the five
preceding and the five following tags counting the
number of occurrences tagged for the perfect. This
measure we call density. The final result is a discrete
topological representation of the text which is more
suitable than others when it comes to accounting for
its continuity, since the same measure is applied to
successive units. Here are the results obtained for
book 2 of Caesar’s Civil War:
Linear chain of tense tags for all main verbs:16
11 12 11 11 11 11 11 11 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12
12 11 11 11 11 11 15 15 12 15 15 14 11 11 15 11 11
11 11 11 11 11 15 15 15 11 12 12 15 14 12 12 12 12
12 12 14 14 14 14 11 11 14 14 12 14 14 14 14 14 14
14 14 14 14 12 12 12 12 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14
14 14 14 15 14 14 12 12 12 12 14 14 etc.
Fig. 7 Distribution of imperfects and pluperfects in main
clauses (texts divided into five segments)
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 181
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Topology based on the neighbouring measures for
each unit (size of neighbourhood¼ 11, property
of neighbourhood¼ number of occurrences of
tag 14 coding the perfect):
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 4 4 5 6 6 7 8 8 8 8 8
9 10 10 10 10 9 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 9 10 11 11 10 10 10
9 8 7 6 6 6 6 etc.
This sequence can be represented graphically.
Figure 8 displays the graphs corresponding respec-
tively to the first two books of Caesar’s Civil War
and to two books of Suetonius’ Lives of the Caesars
(Julius and Tiberius):
These four graphs are eloquent enough; without
going into an exhaustive analysis we shall draw
attention to the sharpest difference between the
two authors. Caesar’s two books begin in a mood
which tends to exclude the perfect whereas
Suetonius is not averse to using this same tense
from the very first paragraphs.
These initial results then can be described as
promising especially if one considers that we have so
far restricted ourselves to a rough and ready measure
of neighbourhood by taking into account only one
parameter. By exploiting more fully the potential of
this method of neighbourhood assessment, by
including more varied descriptive parameters, we
can look forward to more complex and more
informative findings. It will for instance be possible
to complement verbal codes with parameters of
sentence complexity by simultaneously taking into
account the grammatical tags for subordinate clauses.
One problem, however, is that the exploitation of
these charts is rendered difficult by the absence of a
method of comparison between graphs, especially
ones of different lengths. The analysis at this stage
remains essentially qualitative and must
be supplemented by quantitative work on equal
slices of text in order to ensure a more objective
exploitation of data and a more reliable calculation
of distances between texts.
4 Conclusion
The power of last generation computers has made
texts, culled from large language corpora syntacti-
cally tagged with coherence and delicacy, amenable
to the most sophisticated mathematical models
(Juillard 1997, 1998). It has also entailed a renewed
challenge and incentive to linguists’ creativity.
Civil War 1 (Caesar) Life of Julius (Suetonius)
Life of Tiberius (Suetonius)Civil War 2 (Caesar)
Fig. 8 Caesar and Suetonius
X. Luong et al.
182 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The new topological model that we have shown
at work here in applications to English and Latin
language corpora has yielded promising results in
certain key-areas of syntactic organization and
narrative structure. This analytical model, which
adds a new dimension to the exclusive use of
comprehensive graphic representations, has enabled
us to illuminate the way in which F and n verbal
forms of modern written English are combined into
strings of complexity varying according to generic
types and tenors and modes of communication.
Applying the model to Latin texts of considerable
diversity (Caesar, Curtius Quintus, Tacitus, and
Suetonius) has not only given fresh substance to
Emile Benveniste’s seminal dichotomy between
discourse and history, but has also shed new light
on the behaviour of a wide range of frequent verbs
in literary works by authors as different from each
other as Seneca, Pliny, and Petronius.
It is of course necessary and desirable to move
further along the lines of textual exploration
initiated here and, for instance, put the model to
work in subordinate clauses and in areas of the
sentence beyond the verbal group. Research is in
progress that will endeavour to reconcile the use
of more refined analytical tools, elaborated from the
same topological concepts, and the strict adherence
to the fundamental quality of real language texts, the
intrinsic dynamics that Ferdinand de Saussure called
the linearity of language in use.
References
Barthe´lemy, J. P. and Luong, X. (1987). Sur la topologie
d’un arbre phyloge´ne´tique: aspects the´oriques, algor-
ithmiques et applications a` l’analyse de donne´es
textuelles. Math. et Sciences Humaines, no 100: pp. 57–80.
Benveniste, E. (1966/1974). Proble`mes de linguistique
ge´ne´rale, Vols 1 and 2: Paris: Gallimard.
Culler, J. (1975). Structuralist Poetics. London: Routledge.
de Saussure, F. (first edition 1916). Cours de linguistique
ge´ne´rale. Paris: Payot.
Huddleston, R. (1984). Introduction to the Grammar of
English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. K. (2002). The
Cambridge Grammar of the English language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Juillard, M. (1997). Les voisinages de sure et certain dans
les textes, Nume´ro spe´cial lexicologie et linguistique,
Recherches en linguistique e´trange`re, 29, hors se´rie,
Besanc¸on, pp. 277–92.
Juillard, M. (1998). Les lexe`mes dans l’espace du texte:
analyses arbore´es et bases de voisinage, communication
au congre`s de la SAES de 1997, Cycnos 15, Nice, nume´ro
spe´cial, 1998, pp. 57–75.
Juillard, M. (2005). Avatars de la cohe´sion dans les
corpus. In Jaubert, A. (ed.), Cohe´sion et cohe´rence,
e´tudes de linguistique textuelle. Lyon: ENS Editions
(coll. Langages), pp. 175–94.
Juillard, M. and Luong, X. (1989). Unrooted tree
revisited: topology and poetic data. Computers and
the Humanities, 23: 215–25.
Labbe´, C. and Labbe´, D. (2005). A tool for literary
studies: intertextual distance and tree classification.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 21(3): 311–26.
Lafon, P. (1981). Statistique des localisations des formes
d’un texte. Mots, 2: 157–87.
Lamalle, C. and Salem, A. (2002). Types ge´ne´ralise´s
et topographie textuelle dans l’analyse quantitative des
corpus textuels. In Morin, A. and Se´billot, P. (eds),
JADT 2002, 6e`mes Journe´es Internationales d’Analyse
Statistique des Donne´es Textuelles, Vol 2: Saint-Malo:
Irisa et Inria, pp. 529–38.
Longre´e, D. (2003). Temps verbaux et spe´cificite´s
stylistiques chez les historiens latins. In Calboli, G.
et al. (eds), Papers in Grammar IX, 1. Rome: Herder
editrice, pp. 863–75.
Longre´e, D. and Luong, X. (2003). Temps verbaux
et line´arite´ du texte: recherches sur les distances
dans un corpus de textes latins lemmatise´s. Corpus, 2:
119–40.
Longre´e, D., Luong, X., and Mellet, S. (2004). Temps
verbaux, axe syntagmatique, topologie textuelle: analyse
d’un corpus lemmatise´. In Purnelle, G., Fairon, C., and
Dister, A. (eds), Le poids des mots. Louvain: Presses
universitaires de Louvain, Vol. 2: pp. 743–52.
Longre´e, D., Luong, X. and Mellet, S. (2006).
Le classement des textes d’apre`s leur structure:
me´thodes de de´coupage et analyses arbore´es. In Actes
des JADT06, Besanc¸on, Avril 2006.
Longre´e, D. and Mellet, S. (2006). Temps verbaux
et prose historique latine: a` la recherche de nouvelles
methodes d’analyse statistique. In Denooz, J. and
Purnelle, G. (eds), Ordre des mots et cohe´rence
en latin. Lie`ge: Presses universite´ de Lie`ge.
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 183
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Luong, X. and Mellet, S. (1995). Les calculs multi-
dimensionnels au service de l’analyse syntaxique
diachronique. In Bolasco, S., Lebart, L., and Salem, A.
(eds), Analisi statistica dei dati testuali. Rome: CISU.
Vol. 2: pp. 281–88.
Luong, X. and Mellet, S. (2003). Mesures de distance
grammaticale entre les textes. Corpus, 2: 141–66.
Petitot, J. (1991). Syntaxe, topologie et grammaire
cognitive. Langages, 103: 97–128.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. and Svartvik, J.
(1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. London: Longman.
Salem, A. (2002). Topographie textuelle dans
l’analyse quantitative des textes. Actas del segundo
Seminario de la Escuela interlatina de altos Estudios
en Lingu¨ı´stica aplicada, Matema´ticas y Tratamiento
de Corpus (s.n.), San Milla´n de la Cogolla: Logron˜o,
pp. 53–9.
Salem, A. (2004). Introduction a` la re´sonance textuelle. In
Purnelle, G., Fairon, C., and Dister, A. (eds), Le poids
des mots. Louvain: Presses universitaires de Louvain,
Vol. 2: pp. 986–92.
Saussure, F. de (first edition 1916) Cours de linguistique
ge´ne´rale, Paris, Payot.
Se´rant, D. and Thoiron, P. (1988). Topographie des
formes re´pe´te´es. Revue Informatique et Statistique dans
les Sciences humaines 24, pp. 333–43 (Le nombre et le
texte: Hommage a` E´tienne E´vrard).
Thom, R. (1977). Stabilite´ Structurelle et Morphoge´ne`se.
Paris: Benjamin.
Thom, R. (1989). Entretiens avec des mathe´maticiens,
J. Nimier, e´ditions de l’Institut de recherche sur
l’enseignement des mathe´matiques de Lyon.
Westin, I. (2002). Language Change in English Newspaper
Editorials, Language and Computers – Studies in
practical linguistics, Amsterdam/New York: Rodopi,
Vol. 44.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophische Untersuchungen.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Zeeman, C. (1977). Catastrophe Theory: Selected Papers
1972–1977. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Annex 1
The mathematical formulation of linguistic con-
cepts was part of Rene´ Thom’s pioneering work in
the seventies.17 In his topological model—the
so-called ‘catastrophe theory’18—he considers the
possibility of giving a geometric interpretation to
certain concepts that can be placed within the
framework of ‘differentiable manifolds’19 where they
appear as ‘singularities’. One of the a priori most
interesting aspects of Thom’s theory, often referred
to as bordism or cobordism, is the importance
assumed by border areas. It is well known that
linguists, among other scholars, also have to accom-
modate margin, border, transition phenomena, e.g.
the fluctuations of a given form between two or
several grammatical categories. It should therefore
come as no surprise that this ground-breaking
mathematical theory opened promising perspectives
not only to other scientists, particularly physicists
and above all biologists like Zeeman,20 psycholin-
guists such as J. Petitot,21 but also to artists.22
The text as a whole considered as a topological
space is however situated at a much less constraint-
dependent level.23 It is a discrete structure24 for the
exploration of which there is a restricted number of
mathematical tools. It is therefore necessary to look
for a better-suited model, bearing in mind that any
text does represent a topological space in the form
of an ordered linear chain of words characterized by
the neighbourhoods of each of these words and by
their specific order. Whatever the number of these
occurrences, there are computer procedures
enabling the scholar to individualize each of them.
Annex 2: Latin texts codes, with
their generic characterization
(Section 3.2.1)
Annals and commentaries:
Tac_Ann_03 (or Tac_annales3): Book 3 of
Tacitus Annals
Tac_Ann_12 (or Tac_annales12): Book 12 of
Tacitus Annals
Tac_Ann_14 (or Tac_annales14): Book 14 of
Tacitus Annals
Tac_Ann_15 (or Tac_annales15): Book 15 of
Tacitus Annals
CaesBGall_05 (or Bel_Gal5): Book 5 of Caesar’s
de Bello Gallico (Gallic War)
X. Luong et al.
184 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
CaesBCiv_02 (or Bel_civ2): Book 2 of Caesar’s de
Bello Ciuile (Civil War)
Bel_Hisp: de Bello Hispanico (Spanish War)
written by an anonymous officer of Caesar’s
Biographies:
Tac_Agricola (or TacAgri): Tacitus Life of
Agricola
Suet_Iulius: Suetonius Life of Iulius
Suet_Tiberius: Suetonius Life of Tiberius
Curtius_03: Book 3 of Curtius Rufus Quintus
Life of Alexander the Great
Curtius_10: Book 10 of Curtius Rufus Quintus
Life of Alexander the Great
Notes
1 On the concepts of discourse versus history, see Culler
Jonathan (1975), Structuralist poetics, Routledge,
pp. 197–200.
2 Let us however draw attention to articles by P. Lafon
on ‘rafales’ or ‘bursts’ and by D. Se´rant and P. Thoiron
(1988) on the ‘topographie des formes re´pe´te´es’
(topography of repeated forms), as well as to the
THEME function in E´. Brunet’s Hyperbase software.
More recently, A. Salem has also investigated what
he calls textual topography and included a visualiza-
tion tool in his software Lexico (2004).
3 The figure requires a few supplementary explanations:
the method consists in the study of a linguistic object
in a corpus made up of texts. According to the nature
and range of the local question only certain local
specificities (lexical, syntactic, etc.) will be taken into
account (see an illustration below with local questions
on F and n verbal forms in English texts of the
LOB corpus).
4 Let us observe that the interest of text topology
is greatly increased by the lemmatization and
morphosyntactic tagging of machine-readable
language corpora as it is by and large grammatical
categories that lend structure to the syntagmatic
axis (cf. sequences of tenses, anaphoric relations,
variations in enunciatory strategies, etc . . .).
5 IMP¼ imparfait (imperfect), PQP¼ plus-que-parfait
(pluperfect), PS¼ passe´ simple (simple past). The
sequence offered here for the needs of the demonstra-
tion is an artificial construct, but it might easily
materialize in the narrative of a Latin historian or in
a French classical novel, both languages making
a distinction between two simple preterits, the
simple past (passe´ simple) and the imperfect
(imparfait).
6 PST¼ pre´sent, FUT¼ futur simple, PC¼ passe´
compose´.
7 Modal auxiliaries (can, may, must, shall, will, etc . . .)
do not readily fit into the F versus n system since these
verbal operators always figure in texts as F elements
and rarely occur alone except in cases of ellipsis.
Besides, they are not marked for person and number,
have no subjunctive or imperative mood and
cannot undergo the passive transformation. R. Quirk
lists five criteria for F verbs, on the basis of which
he suggests a gradience or scale of finiteness (Quirk,
et al., A Comprehensive grammar of the English
language, London, Longman, 1985, 3.52, p. 150).
On the question of finiteness versus non-finiteness,
see also Huddleston, Introduction to the Grammar
of English, Cambridge University Press, 1984,
pp. 81–84 and 207–209. Huddleston & Pullum
(2002), The Cambridge Grammar of the English
Language, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
passim.
8 On the notion of head, see Quirk et al., op. cit., 2.27,
p. 61.
9 For instance, we realized with relief that infinitive
TO had been assigned a tag different from that of
the homograph preposition. This judicious tagging
choice greatly facilitated the distinction between
infinitives and conjugated base forms.
10 Ten 2000-word samples for subsections relabelled
C01, C02, C03 (from LOB corpus section A press
reportage), C4, C7, C8 (from LOB corpus section B
press editorial), C17 (from LOB corpus section F
popular lore), C31 and C32 (from LOB corpus section
H miscellaneous: government documents, etc.), C35
and C36 (from LOB corpus section J learned and
scientific writing), C45 (from LOB corpus section L
mystery and detective fiction), C53 (from LOB corpus
section P romance and love story), Twenty 2000-word
samples for subsections P01 (romance and love story),
D01 (religion), E01 (skills), A02 (press reportage),
H11 (miscellaneous: government documents, etc.),
N01 (adventure and western fiction), K01 (general
fiction), G51 (belles lettres).
11 For more details on this aspect of language cohesion,
see: Juillard (2005, Avatars de la cohe´sion dans les
corpus, in Jaubert, A., ed., Cohe´sion et cohe´rence,
e´tudes de linguistique textuelle, Langages, Lyon, ENS
e´ditions, pp. 175–94).
12 In our coding options we deliberately conflated
modal and accompanying base form as one F
element.
The Concept of Text Topology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007 185
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
13 The move towards greater informality of style in press
editorials detected by I. Westin had obviously not
been completed by the time the LOB corpus was
assembled (Westin, 2002, Language change in English
newspaper editorials, Language and Computers -
Studies in practical linguistics, 44, Rodopi,
Amsterdam/New York).
14 Tree-analysis is a classificatory topological approach
(ARBORLING Logiciel d’Analyse Arbore´e—Luong’s
‘grouping method’—CNRS UMR 6039) which
begins with the most stable clusters and then moves
on from cluster to cluster in order to integrate less
typical elements but can be interrupted at any stage of
the analysis without affecting the resulting classifica-
tion. Thus, the analysis of the occurrences in ‘rafales’
or bursts of the 14 most common verbs in Petronius,
also figuring in Seneca’s de Vita Beata, yields exactly
the same configuration as the initial analysis of the
totality of 24 verbs with a clear-cut opposition
between on the one hand ago, venio, scio, do and
facio, habeo, inquio and possum on the other and more
sharply individualized central clusters.
15 Longre´e et al. 2006.
16 Key to tags: 11¼ present; 12¼ imperfect; 14¼ perfect;
15¼ pluperfect.
17 Mathematician and philosopher (1924–2002),
awarded the Fields medal for 1958.
18 These catastrophes, as the mathematician once
humorously remarked, have never killed anybody.
The object of Thom’s so-called ‘catastrophe theory’ is
to study the way in which very diverse systems can
vary when one parameter is altered. According to
R. Thom, there are seven forms which can develop to
reach a point of no-return: the fold, the dove-tail, the
flounce, the butterfly, the elliptical umbilic (e.g. the
point of a needle), the parabolic umbilic (e.g. the cap
of a mushroom), the hyperbolic umbilic (e.g. the crest
of a wave breaking). For further information see
Thom R., Stabilite´ structurelle et morphoge´ne`se,
Intere´ditions, 1977.
19 For instance, the curves and surfaces in R3, the three-
dimensional Euclidean space, which are continuous
and with continuous derivatives.
20 Zeeman (1977) Catastrophe Theory: Selected Papers
1972–1977, Addison-Wesley, New York.
21 Petitot (1991), Syntaxe, topologique et grammaire
cognitive, Langages, 103, 97–128.
22 In 1983, Salvador Dali painted a canvas as a tribute
to the Fields medal laureate and the composer Pascal
Dusapin dedicated one of his works to him in 1996.
23 Structural levels in mathematics go from the least
constrained to the most constrained, each of them
being associated with a specific class of functions:
at the lowest level one finds set-theory structures
(points independent of each other, ordinary func-
tions), at level one topological structures (points
‘sticking’ together through qualitative neighbourhood
relations, continuous functions), at level two differ-
entiable structures, etc...
24 A topology on a set E is said to be ‘discrete’ if
the totality of its parts P[E] can be considered as
neighbourhoods for the elements of E.
X. Luong et al.
186 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 22, No. 2, 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
