Journal of  the Chicago Colloquium on Digital Humanities and Computer Science
Volume 1 Number 3 (2011)
The Other Side of  the Panopticon: Technology, Archives, and the Difficulty of  
Seeing Victorian Heterotopias
Jo Guldi, Harvard Society of  Fellows, Harvard University
Abstract
Can digital methods resolve major debates in the historiography of  political agency? In recent 
decades, historical scholarship in British politics has identified an era of  expert rule at the cost of  
seemingly losing the thread of  successful movements from below after 1815. The talk will outline 
the failures of  the linguistic turn and the subsequent return of  British social history back to the 
state. An emerging consensus now describes an era of  modern expert rule characterized by the 
state’s presence in every domain of  everyday life, including infrastructure, public health, crime, 
poverty, and housing. Historians in this tradition routinely describe Britain 1848 as a nation where 
the subaltern features chiefly as the subject of  surveillance, management, and repression. Much 
more rarely do these stories successfully describe subalterns after 1848 as political actors in their 
own right. Political historians are thus challenged by questions first raised by Karl Polanyi, Michel 
Foucault, and Jurgen Habermas. Is the hegemonic power of  the state in the modern world 
complete? Where can one find evidence of  structural or continuous resistance? Successfully 
identifying agency from below demands a redefinition of  political agency and new methodologies 
for sorting the masses of  texts opened up for mining by the digital era. Such questions require us to 
excavate methodologies from late nineteenth-century philosophers of  language like Ernst Cassirer, 
mid-century geographers like Peter Gould, scholars of  mobile structure like E. J. Hobsbawn, and 
anarchist writers like Colin Ward. These methods, I shall argue, foreground the potential of  language 
mining for identifying spaces of  emergent publics where agency from below has been expressed 
over the long duree.
Applied to digital texts, landscape methods can enhance the depth and breadth of  research on 
alternative agency. A program for digital research is presented, together with a database on the 
heterotopias of  late nineteenth-century London, designed to highlight the spatiality of  state 
surveillance, the land reform movement, theosophists, slumming, sexual and ethnic subcultures, 
bohemia, and hobohemia. Preliminary maps of  places named in the database will be presented in 
conjunction with a discussion of  how such a method might address larger historiographical 
concerns.