ADHO Panel: Beyond Text
John Unsworth (unsworth@uiuc.edu)
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Kevin Franklin (kfranklin@hri.uci.edu)
University of California Humanities Research
Institute (UCHRI)
Matt Kirschenbaum
(mkirschenbaum@gmail.com)
University of Maryland
Lev Manovich (manovich.lev@gmail.com)
University of California, San Diego
Catherine Plaisant (plaisant@cs.umd.edu)
University of Maryland
University of California, San Diego
T his panel will engage in a discussion of work being donein the humanities that is computational but not
literary/linguistic, or at least not primarily focused on text. The
panel will also discuss the possibilities for collaboration across
the different paradigms of humanities computing/new
media/visual culture/grid computing/critical studies.
Moderator: John Unsworth
Participants:
Kevin Franklin
Kevin Franklin is executive director of the University of
California Humanities Research Institute (UCHRI) and a former
deputy director of the San Diego Supercomputer Center. He
serves as co-chair for the Humanities, Arts and Social Science
Research Group for the Global Grid Forum and is a member
of the UC Humanities, Arts and Social Science Technology
Council and theWorldwide University Network Grid Advisory
Committee. Franklin coordinates UCHRI research and
development activities at the interface of the humanities, arts,
science and technology.
Lev Manovich
Lev Manovich (<http://www.manovich.net>) is a
Professor in the Visual Arts Department, University of
California, San Diego where he teaches courses in new media
art and theory. He is the author of The Language of NewMedia
(The MIT Press, 2001), Tekstura: Russian Essays on Visual
Culture (Chicago University Press, 1993) as well as many
articles which have been published in 28 countries. Manovich
is in demand to lecture on new media; since 1999 he delivered
over 180 lectures in North and South America, Europe, and
Asia. His awards include Mellon Fellowship and Guggenheim
Fellowship (2002-2003).
Matt Kirschenbaum
Matthew G. Kirschenbaum is an Associate Professor in the
Department of English at the University of Maryland and
Associate Director of the Maryland Institute for Technology
in the Humanites (MITH), an applied thinktank for the digital
humanities. He is also an affiliated faculty member with the
Human-Computer Interaction Lab at Maryland, and a Vice
President of the Electronic Literature Organization.
Kirschenbaum specializes in digital humanities, electronic
literature and creative new media (including games), textual
studies, and postmodern/experimental literature. He has a Ph.D.
in English from the University of Virginia, and was trained in
humanities computing at Virginia's Electronic Text Center and
Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities (where
he was the Project Manager of the William Blake Archive).
His dissertation was the first electronic dissertation in the
English department at Virginia and one of the very first in the
nation.
Catherine Plaisant
Dr. Catherine Plaisant is Associate Research Scientist at the
Human-Computer Interaction Laboratory of the University of
Maryland Institute for Advanced Computer Studies. She earned
a Doctorat d'Ingenieur degree in France in 1982. In 1987 she
joined Professor Ben Shneiderman at the Human-Computer
Interaction Laboratory. She enjoys most working with
multidisciplinary teams on designing and evaluating new
interface technologies that are useable and useful. Her research
contributions range from focused user interaction techniques
(e.g. Excentric Labeling) to innovative visualizations (such as
LifeLines for personal records or SpaceTree for hierarchical
data exploration) and interactive search interface techniques
such as Query Previews. Those interaction techniques have
been carefully validated with user studies and are finding
applications in industry and government information systems
and digital libraries. She has written over 90 refereed technical
publications on the subjects of information visualization, digital
libraries, universal access, image browsing, input devices, online
help, home automation, network management, telemedicine
etc. She recently co-authored with Ben Shneiderman the 4th
Edition of Designing the User Interface, one of the major books
on the topic of Human-Computer Interaction.
Page 217
Digital Humanities 2007
