Bits and Pieces of Text:
Appraisal of a Natural Electronic
Archive
Maria Esteva (mesteva@mail.utexas.edu)
School of Information
University of Texas at Austin
T his paper presents the methods and tools designed toappraise a digital archive. The attributes characterizing
the archive at hand led to the development of the concept of
natural electronic archives that would allow transforming the
archive as a whole into a unit of analysis. The methodology for
appraising the archive combines traditional archival concepts
while adding tools –such as text mining and social network
analysis– taken from other fields.
The digital archive belongs to a philanthropic agency whose
activities in support of the arts, sciences and social welfare in
Argentina span from the mid 1980s until its closure in
December of 2005. In the early 1990s the institution
implemented a networked server to store, retrieve, and share
electronic texts, email, applications, and databases. In it, each
employee had a virtual folder with his or her initials to store
the files that they created. To comply with legal requirements
the archive must be kept closed but accessible for the next 10
years. In parallel, appraisal needed to be undertaken to decide
on the archive’s long term destiny. An initial survey of the
archive led to the development of the natural archive concept
and suggested an appraisal method to establish archival
evidence.
The natural electronic archive concept grew while I was
surveying the server and from the interviews conducted with
staff members who had worked in the organization since it
opened. Based on my analysis, I concluded that the manner in
which records were generated and kept could not easily be
ascribed to digital archiving models currently discussed in the
literature. These models focus more on the creation of sound
electronic records, the design of electronic record-keeping
systems, and on institutional repository archiving models than
on the way in which digital archives exist “in the wild”
(Bearman & Trant, 1997; Cox, 1997; Duranti et al., 2002;
InterPARES Authenticity Task Force 2002; Jones et al., 2006).
The natural archive concept builds partly on that of “natural
collections” proposed by Phillip Cronenwett to describe
collections of literary manuscripts as they leave the hand of the
creator (Cronnenwett, 1984, p.106). I suggest that this concept
Page 55
Digital Humanities 2007
is relevant both to the case study at hand, as well as to archives
of public or private persons and institutions showing similar
characteristics.
Creation of natural electronic archives involves a set of ad-hoc
practices developed as people adjust to and learn how to use
information technologies. A natural archive is not designed or
managed by records managers or archivists. Instead, it is what
those working in institutions, in different capacities, using
different technologies, and making decisions, make of it. In a
natural archive, records are created, named, destroyed, or
retained according to individual work-practices. Each record
creator decides on structure and naming conventions for files
and folders, spontaneously or consistently, according to
individual mnemonic rules or the spur of the moment. Within
the virtual folders, images, spreadsheets, texts, web sites,
databases, back-ups, and applications live together under the
same roof, placed or misplaced, in organized or disorganized
fashion, in general without descriptive clues.
In a context without explicit recordkeeping rules, bits and pieces
of text are ubiquitous inhabitants. Either shared by different
members of a network or used repeatedly by their creators, they
constitute the core of many records. This repetition of fragments
afforded by the cut and paste function of the text editor, speaks
as much of provenance, group collaboration and fair use, as of
hierarchies and corporate culture. As a consequence of all of
these phenomena, records within a natural archive are difficult
to identify and lack formal documentation. This creates doubts
about their capacity to provide evidence.
An appraisal method that uses TextMining and Social Network
Analysis was designed to determine what type of evidence of
the organization that created it is provided by a natural
electronic archive. The method is rooted in concerns expressed
by Peter Boticelli in his study of networked organizations
(Boticelli, 2000). It considers the need to document dynamics
and changes in organizations and it explores the meaning of
evidence and archival bond –understood as the “network of
relationships between records” – in an ambiguous environment
(Duranti & Guercio, 1997). Also, it highlights the importance
of preserving evidence of the archive’s formation process that
will allow the study of its technological history and social uses
(Lubar, 1996; Parezo, 1996). Its main departure from other
appraisal methods is that it uses digital tools to analyze a large
corpus of records inductively.
Determining archival evidence implies being able to map the
organization through its records. Text Mining and Social
Network Analysis use computing algorithms to discover
knowledge about the relations among electronic records. By
measuring the similarity between texts produced and
co-produced by staff members within frameworks of time and
provenance, the strength of relationships between records and
between the staff members and/or functions that created them
can be established. In turn, by averaging the similarities between
the records of all pairs of staff members or functions across
time, organizational structure and functions as well as
correspondent changes in dynamics emerge. To confirm the
validity of the findings, results are contrasted against the
narratives of staff members about who they collaborated with,
when, and in what. In this way, the evidence provided by the
electronic records in this natural archive can be attested
A proof of concept was conducted to determine the feasibility
of the appraisal method. For this, copies of electronic text
records from the archive were used, while the original archive,
kept with its directory structure intact, remains as guarantee of
provenance and original order. Pre-processing documents
involved using file management software to sort files within
directories and sub-directories to construct sets belonging to a
group of staff members that worked in the organization during
a one year period. After conversion to .txt format, the sets were
submitted to Rainbow, an open source text classification and
retrieval tool, to obtain a vector spacemodel (McCallum, 1996).
In this phase, several trials were conducted to find the best way
to narrow the vocabulary without losing language subtleties.
From this model, pair-wise distances between documents where
calculated using the cosine similarity formula in MatLab on a
UNIX server. The resultant matrix was submitted to the social
network analysis softwareUCINET to obtain a network drawing
of the distances between texts (Borgatti et al., 2002). In turn,
the average of distances corresponding to each staff member
were calculated to obtain a matrix of relationships between staff
members during one year.
The experiment suggested that relationships between staff
members do emerge from the similarities and differences
between the texts that they create. Testing showed that staff
members who were leaving the organization and wrote farewell
or personal records were less related to those cooperating in
the preparation of monthly or annual reports. Also, project
proposals written by grant applicants and stored in the shared
server were barely related to reports or appropriation requests
written by members of the organization. These preliminary
results indicated that shifts in functions and consequent
relationships between staff members can emerge from electronic
texts.
The proof of concept also examined the use of cluster analysis
to explore the concept of archival bond in natural electronic
archives. Analyzing the content of strongly and poorly related
records can explain what characterizes relationships between
records –provenance, date, type of record, contents, topic – and
whether these features can be mapped onto theoretical
conceptualizations of archival bond. It will also explain the role
of drafts, versions, and non-records by finding the proportion
in which they exist in the natural archive and how close or not
they are to complete records.
Page 56
Digital Humanities 2007
Before issuing the final appraisal protocol, changes had to be
implemented and concerns addressed. Since the archive contains
formats as old as Microsoft Word 5.0 for DOS, a converter
with broad file format support was found to transform old files
to ANSI text so they can be processed by Rainbow. Because
there are various pieces of software involved, processes need
to be automated and simplified as much as possible and issues
related to the size of the text sets and matrices vis a vis the
power of the processing tools have to be considered. Through
a research grant from the University of Texas at Austin a
programmer was hired to modify existing applications and
develop new ones. Rainbow’s tokenizer was modified to
recognize Spanish characters and to include the Oleander
Spanish stemmer (Oleander Solutions, 2006). The cosine
similarity algorithm was coded in C++ so that bigger matrices
can be processed efficiently in a UNIX server. To improve the
ability to distinguish the characteristics of individual texts,
Tf-idf capabilities were added to the script. The program outputs
both a matrix of cosine similarities between every other
document and a matrix of the averages of cosine similarity
distances between every other author in the sample. Current
testing involves processing sets with all the texts produced in
one year by every author to determine changes in collaboration
dynamics. After processing the matrices with UCINET,
preliminary results for author’s yearly averages show
relationships that concur with their functions in the institution
(See Fig. 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Network drawing of averages of cosine similarities between a set of
544 records of different staff members during the year 1996. The director is
at the center of the network which corresponds with his functions in the
organization and the data gathered in the interviews. Most of the records
produced by the financial manager are non-textual and remained within the
database systems which explains the distance between him and the director.
Figure 2. Network drawing of averages of cosine similarities between 719
records of different staff members during the year 1997. As new staff members
added their records in the networked directory and started their own
relationships, the majority of the director’s previous relationships and his
status in the network remained stable.
The use of Text Mining and Social Network Analysis promises
to allow archivists to explore and define the meaning of
evidence in natural electronic archives. Instead of intuition and
art, as appraisal has been characterized, the opportunity exists
to use inductive quantitative methods to make of appraisal a
research endeavor (Eastwood, 1992).Moreover, the use of these
methods opens the doors to the enormous potential of digital
tools in the analysis and processing of digital archives.
Bibliography
Authenticity Task Force. Requirements for Assessing and
Maintaining the Authenticity of Electronic Records.
InterPARES, 2002. Accessed 2005-10-06. <http://www.I
nterPARES.org/display_file.cfm?doc=ip1_au
thenticity_requirements.pdf>
Bearman, David, and Jennifer Trant. "Electronic Records
Research Working Meeting May 28-30, 1997: A Report from
theArchives Community."D-Lib ( July/August 1997). Accessed
2005-10-03.<http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july97/
07bearman.html>
Borgatti, Stephan P., , and Freeman, L.C. UCINET 6 Social
Networks Analysis Software. 2002. Accessed 2005-04-01. <h
ttp://www.analytictech.com/ucinet/ucinet.
htm>
Boticelli, Peter. "Records Appraisal in Network Organizations."
Archivaria 49 (2000): 161-191.
Cox, Richard J. " Electronic Systems and RecordsManagement
in the Information Age: An Introduction." ASIS 23.5 (1997).
Page 57
Digital Humanities 2007
Accessed 2005-10-03. <http://www.asis.org/Bulle
tin/Jun-97/cox.html>
Cronenwett, Philip N. "Appraisal of Literary Manuscripts."
Archival Choices: Managing the Historical Record in an Age
of Abundance.Ed. Nancy E. Peace. Lexington,MA: Lexington
Books, 1984. 105-116.
Duranti, Luciana, Terry Eastwood, and Heather McNeil.
Preservation of the Integrity of Electronic Records. Boston:
Kluwer Academic, 2002.
Duranti, Luciana, and Maria Guercio. "Research Issues in
Archival Bond." Electronic Records Meeting, Session I. 1997.
Accessed 2006-03-29. <http://www.archimuse.com/
erecs97/s1-ld-mg.HTM>
Eastwood, Terry. "Towards a Social Theory of Appraisal." The
Archival Imagination: Essays in Honor of Hugh A. Taylor .
Ed. Barbara L. Craig. Ottawa: Association of Canadian
Archivists, 1992. 71-89.
Jones, Richard, Theo Andrew, and John MacColl. The
Institutional Repository. Oxford, UK: Chandos Publishing
Limited, 2006.
Lubar, Steven. "Learning fromTechnological Things." Learning
from Things. Ed. W. David Kingery. Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996. 31-34.
McCallum, AndrewK. Bow: A Toolkit for Statistical Language
Modeling, Text Retrieval, Classification and Clustering. 1996.
Accessed 2005-02-02. <http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~mc
callum/bow>
Oleander Solutions. Oleander Stemming Library. 2006.
Accessed 2006-11-24. <http://www.oleandersoluti
ons.com/stemming.html>
Parezo, Nancy J. "The Formation of Anthropological Archival
Records." Learning from Things. Ed. W. David Kingery.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996.
145-174.
