Digitization and Publication of
the Goethe-Dictionary on the
Internet
Kurt Gärtner (gaertnek@staff.uni-marburg.de)
University of Trier, Germany
Vera Hildenbrandt (hildenbr@uni-trier.de)
University of Trier, Germany
The Goethe Dictionary(Goethe Wörterbuch = GWb) is one of
the most ambitious projects in German lexicography. Its
importance for literary and linguistic research on the writings
of the most famous German author Johann Wolfgang von
Goethe (1749-1832) can not be overestimated. Although still
a work in progress – hitherto four volumes (A—inhaftieren)
have been completed – the GWb has become an essential tool
not only for the study of the wide ranging vocabulary of an
individual author, but also – due to the enormous influence of
this author – an indispensable instrument for research on the
history of the German language and culture during one of the
key periods of their development. The vocabulary of Goethe
comprises about 90.000 words, more than any other writer in
German has ever used, because he not only wrote as a poet, but
was also engaged in serious research in fields like anatomy,
geology and botany; and in addition to that he served as a
minister to the court of Weimar and was well familiar with all
aspects of the administrative language of his time.
The preparation of the GWb began shortly after the 2nd world
war in 1947, the 1st volume appeared in 1978, the second
instalment of the 5th volume (Jammernachbar—kanonieren)
in 2005. In 2003 plans were developed for the creation of a
digital version of the GWb which so far had been published
only in a printed form. A grant proposal for the digitization had
been drawn up by the Competence Centre for Electronic
Retrieval and Publication Methods in the Humanities
(Kompetenzzentrum für elektronische Erschließungs- und
Publikationsverfahren) at the University of Trier in
collaboration with the Interacademic Committee for the Goethe
Dictionary of three German Academies of Sciences and
Humanities (Berlin-Brandenburg, Göttingen, Heidelberg).
After receiving a grant from theGerman Research Association
(Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) the digitization project
started in May 2004 at the University of Trier. By end of 2005
the first 3 volumes were made freely available on the internet
(<http://www.gwb.uni-trier.de>) in a preliminary
version which has been refined in the following time
considerably. In future the GWb will continue to be published
in print, but will be also made freely available on the Internet
in a version which is closely related to the printed form with
its stable references for reliable quotations. Conservative
Goethe-scholars with their prejudices towards the new media
may quote the book, although their secretaries got the quotations
from the digital version. It is therefore essential that the digitized
version is an absolutely correct rendering of the printed version
and offers the same degree of reliability. However, the Internet
version will offer much more than the book with its restriction
caused by the procrustean bed of its alphabetical macrostructure:
Via a comfortable and user-friendly interface, the electronic
GWb is to provide flexible and innovative possibilities for
literary and linguistic research on Goethe and the history of the
German language and its vocabulary as well as for everyone
interested in Goethe and the language of his time, both in
Germany and abroad. The following short description of the
digitization project will outline the main features of its
innovative approach to making the informational potential of
a traditional dictionary fully available. The various steps of the
project will be described in detail in the proposed paper.
The first task in the project’s working plan consisted of a minute
analysis of all the typographical features of the microstructure
of an entry in order to draw up a carefully organised set of
instructions or functional specifications (Pflichtenheft) for the
typists who should be enabled to apply appropriate tags related
to the specific typographical functions. This preliminary tagging
is done by the typist during his keying in the text of an entry;
it saves a considerable amount of time in a later stage of the
project when XML/TEI conformant markup is applied.
The text of the GWb has been made machine readable via
double keying, a method strongly recommended by Wilhelm
Ott and successfully practised in previous lexicographical
projects of the Trier Competence Centre, e.g. theMiddle High
German Dictionaries Interlinked (Mittelhochdeutsche
Wörterbücher im Verbund), <http://www.MWV.uni-tr
ier.de>, and the digitization of the 33 vols. of theDeutsches
Wörterbuch by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, <http://www.
DWB.uni-trier.de>, the German equivalent to the OED.
The idea of scanning the GWb and using OCR software for
processing the data had been excluded from the beginning,
because of the highly specialised typography and the far too
time-consuming and costly correction processes afterwards.
The data input took place in China. Two teams were capturing
the GWb in MS-Word via double keying and using
TUSTEP-tags for encoding the typographical features and the
special characters. After the transfer of the data to Germany
via e-mail, the data were converted into the TUSTEP-format.
The two versions were collated automatically by
TUSTEP-routines; TUSTEP also generated a list of differences,
which has been correctedmanually after comparing the printed
Page 70
Digital Humanities 2007
GWb. The result of this step was an error-free TUSTEP-version
of the GWb.
Apart from fulltext retrieval, the TUSTEP-version already offers
a number of other searches, but it is difficult to perform
combined queries without further markup. For this step the
TEI-Guidelines were used; they were not followed always
strictly, some deviations were necessary to suit the specialities
of the microstructure of a GWb-entry. Because of the huge
amount of data, the XML/TEI-conformant markup had to be
inserted by using automatic routines wherever possible. For
this we used again TUSTEP-modules which proved to work
efficiently and with an outmost degree of accuracy.
The XML/TEI-encoded data were stored in a data base and a
graphical user interface was developed using several tools and
methods which we had used for the previous lexicographical
projects and which have been described elsewhere in detail by
Thomas Burch (<http://aspn.activestate.com/A
SPN/Tcl/TclConferencePapers2002/Tcl2002pa
pers/>).
The contribution will present a detailed introduction to the user
interface and the functionalities of the electronic GWb. We
took great pains to display the GWb in a way that makes it
attractive and easy to use. Unlike other digital dictionaries
(OED, TLF) we did not allow to break up the macrostructure
in single entries separately shown (one screen = one entry), but
kept the structure of the printed dictionary thus allowing a
comfortable overview over series of compounds beginning with
the same determinative. The framing of the window allows an
easy navigation especially through long entries with an
elaborated hierarchical microstructure, thus helping the user to
find as quickly as possible what he is looking for. – As the
project is still a work in progress, the presenting author would
gladly discuss the perspectives of what remains to be done.
