Digital Text Projects in Eastern
Europe: Promoting International
Interoperability
Miranda Remnek (mremnek@uiuc.edu)
Slavic & Eastern European Library
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
T he widely divergent languages and cultures of Russia,Eastern Europe & Eurasia (hereafter Eastern Europe),
present a rich terrain for digital scholarship, but owing to a
number of factors—including poorly-endowed or
mutually-incompatible infrastructures, language barriers, and
different approaches to the construction of metadata—the
corpora already in existence and those in development are often
poorly known elsewhere, and in many cases are hidden from
international resource discovery and data sharing.
In view of this situation, it was clear to the Digital Projects
Subcommittee of theAmerican Association for the Advancement
of Slavic Studies (<http://www.aaass.org>) that
improved documentation would constitute an important step
toward the promotion of knowledge sharing and
interoperability.1 The Slavic & East European Library at UIUC
is therefore building an international Inventory of Slavic, East
European and Eurasian Digital Projects (<http://www.l
ibrary.uiuc.edu/spx/inventory>). The Inventory
already describes at least 360 collections in 110 projects, and
we also foresee web submissions from international partners
to promote collaborative registration. But even now the
Inventory is heavily used; recent statistics indicate that in the
period July 2005-June 2006 it received around 25,000 hits. It
has also become anOAIData Provider, and although inventory
contents (unlike the digital collections they record) are
sometimes not reflected in aggregated search services like
OAIster (<http://oaister.umdl.umich.edu/o/oa
ister/>), the Inventory’s records have indeed been harvested
and now display in OAIster searches—likely to improve
dramatically the visibility of substantive digital projects in the
Slavic field.
But the project goals go far beyond the compilation of a mere
inventory. Besides the implementation of intensive content
development, promotion of metadata standardization, expanded
reference assistance and interactive user options, the Inventory
will focus on an expansion of the OAI data provider system
and item-level harvesting. (It also hopes to explore customized
delivery services and an archival framework for at-risk
collections in the Slavic field, currently being explored through
an inter-institutional grant proposal).
Nevertheless, the project team acknowledges that metadata
practices in Eastern Europe are still very diverse, and far from
standardized. At one end of the scale, where relatively simple
encoding is involved, even schemes like Dublin Core are poorly
recognized. This makes the implementation of relatively
well-established data-sharing protocols like OAI-PMH (Open
Archives Initiative: Protocol for Metadata Harvesting) little
known in Eastern Europe. A registry of OAI data providers at
UIUC demonstrates that while OAI data providers are well
established in the US and Western Europe, they are much less
widely encountered further East.2 True, the implementation of
OAI data interchange is not necessarily well standardized in
countries with far more providers.3 Furthermore, the whole
question of the efficacy of OAI-PMH as a metadata transfer
protocol is still somewhat open to question.4 Nevertheless, its
power is generally well-recognized, and its further penetration
into Eastern Europe is certainly a desirable goal.
At the other end of the scale, the level of deep encoding is even
less widely standardized in Eastern Europe. The decade-long
Institute of World Literature project in Moscow known as FEB
(Fundamental'naia elektronaia biblioteka) (<http://www.
feb-web.ru/>) has an enviable collection of over 50,000
Russian literature texts, all heavily encoded in SGML—but not
according to the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) Guidelines.
True, the TEI is not a standard, but interoperability with such
an impressive collection would be highly desirable. Other such
examples are available. To be sure, there are exceptions: the
recent TEI meeting in Sofia, Bulgaria revealed the extent to
which TEI projects are beginning to gain root in South Eastern
Europe.5 There are also similar developments in a more abstract
sense. The TEI Guidelines have been translated into Russian,6
and efforts are also being made to promote the further
internationalization of the Guidelines, and to ensure their
availability in a greater number of languages, including
Bulgarian.
Yet even when East European scholarly projects adopt the TEI,
standardized approaches to the conversion of metadata to
OAI-compliant formats are also at issue, and there is evidently
much ground still to be covered. Hence, the object of this paper
will be to:
1. Design and conduct a survey of metadata practices in a
number of East European digital centers (including existing
UIUC partners) that are sponsored both by institutions and
by individual faculty teams;
2. Produce an up-to-date analysis of their awareness,
evaluation and observance of international metadata
standards;
Page 173
Digital Humanities 2007
3. Identify problems and practices preventing their
implementation;
4. Suggest ways in which steps can be taken to ameliorate this
situation, including crosswalks and other technical
procedures.
The results of this exercise will not only assist in a practical
sense the development of the Inventory of Slavic, East European
and Eurasian Digital Projects (the only registry of substantive,
scholarly East European digital initiatives), but will also result
in better awareness and information-sharing among Slavic
digital practitioners. This is especially vital as the institutional
repository movement gains ground.7 Experience shows,
particularly in West Europe, that the issue of standardized
metadata is paramount, and that subject repositories are
becoming of even greater interest since they tend to be
populated by scholars working on their own projects and
producingmore substantive metadata. In this environment, East
European scholars should not excluded from the pool of
informed experience.
1. Other points in the group’s charge include: (2) fostering informed
participation in future initiatives; (3-4) increasing digital
information and training opportunities for Slavic librarians; (5)
complementing national efforts to establish digital repositories.
See <http://www.library.uiuc.edu/spx/BnD
/DigPro.htm#charge>
2. See <http://gita.grainger.uiuc.edu/regis
try/ListTLDs.asp>. U.S. providers are proliferating: in
the past year the number of “edu” domains increased from 265 to
332, and “org” domains from 149 to 182. Likewise in Western
Europe: U.K. DPs went from 89 to 114, Germany from 73 to 99.
But in Eastern Europe it is different; the totals for Hungary (4),
Czech Republic (2) and Slovenia (2) stayed the same this year,
and Russia increased only slightly, from 3 to 4. Only Poland
increased significantly, from 4 to 18.
3. As reported at the Oct. 2005OAIworkshop in Geneva, the German
Initiative for Networked Information (DINI) has installed a
certificate system in order to bring OAI providers into greater
standardization.
4. The OpenArchives Initiative OAI-Implementers group announced
on Nov. 3 2005 that it is “studying the effectiveness of OAI and
some other related methods of creating interoperable online
libraries” and has “posted a questionnaire 'Survey on Common
Interface Frameworks for Online Libraries' on the web.”
5. See Milena Dobreva, “TEI in South-Eastern Europe: Experience
and Prospects,” TEI Members Meeting, Sofia, Bulgaria, October
28, 2005.
6. See <http://www.tei-c.org.uk/Lite/teiu5_
ru.rtf>.
7. Here again the number of East European repositories lags far
behind. In July 2006 there were 144 DSpace instances worldwide,
and less than half were in the U.S. and U.K. (62), indicating that
many non-English-speaking countries (like Japan) are aware of
and attracted to this increasingly popular open source software.
But in Eastern Europe only 2 DSpace sites were listed (in Russia).
This lack of awareness was substantiated at an e-text conference
in Eastern Russia in July 2006 entitledModern Informational
Technologies and Written Heritage: From Ancient Manuscripts
to Electronic Texts at which I gave a presentation entitled
“Promoting the TEI in scholarly communities: OAI harvesting,
digital repositories.” Conference attendees described many
sophisticated projects, but there was little familiarity with OAI or
digital repository software used in the West. One scholar was
familiar with these technologies, but in a presentation entitled: “A
Computer System for the Creation andMaintenance of Electronic
Collections of Ancient Texts,” V. S. Iuzhikov (Kazan State
University) wrote: “For the creation and development of electronic
libraries there are several systems. Among the best known are
Greenstone and DSpace. But they are oriented mostly toward text
libraries with small number of illustrations, which are poorly suited
for the collection of old printed works. Therefore it is less
time-consuming and gives better result to build a local system.”
Given the specialized nature of his material, this conclusion was
understandable. Yet the general lack of East European involvement
with these international standards andmethodologies remains true.
Page 174
Digital Humanities 2007
