Digital Editing, Infrastructure
Obstacles, and the World of
Virtual Appliances
Jarom Lyle McDonald
(jarom_mcdonald@byu.edu)
Brigham Young University
A challenge that is often too daunting for new collaborativedigital editing projects is that of production and
publication infrastructure. The TEI Consortium has done a
wonderful job of providing a wealth of resources to speak to
this need for infrastructure support; with the online guidelines,
samples, and stylesheets, to the Roma customization generator,
to the (underutilized) TEI wiki, a project in the planning stages
has the ability to gather more than enough information and
advice for developing a solid infrastructure for software
encoding, database storage, web delivery.
Unfortunately, information and advice often isn't enough, and
projects which don't have access to sufficient technical skills
sometimes cannot even get their database installed, their web
server up and running, or their transformations working
properly. This lack of infrastructure support often leaves
promising projects floundering and potential digital humanities
scholars soured on the ability of technology to deliver on its
revolutionary promises.
There are some viable products that have become available in
the past few years specifically designed to alleviate this problem
of a general lack of infrastructure support. For example,
<teiPublisher> a Publishing system built on the eXist database
and the Lucene search engine, describes itself as “an extensible,
modular and configurable xml-based repository . . . designed
to provide administrative tools to help repository managers
with limited technical knowledge manage their repositories”
(http://teipublisher.sourceforge.net). More ambitiously,
Sebastian Rahtz has created a collection of Linux packages at
http://tei.oucs.ox.ac.uk/teideb/ which provide instant
TEI-informed installation of such products as eXist, the Cocoon
publishing system, the Saxon XSL transformation engine, and
so forth. However such products are not in widespread use,
perhaps because those who need them the most are even
struggling with more basic infrastructure problems such as
getting a web server installed.
Enter the appearance of virtual appliances. The world of
hardware virtualization has exploded over the past few years;
Page 133
Digital Humanities 2007
IT professionals from a wide variety of fields have seen the
benefits of having a single piece of hardware run multiple
“virtual machines,” each appearing to be a real machine to the
outside networked world. Virtual appliances are small imprint
virtual machines, each designed for a different job, that can
reside on a physical machine and perform some sort of task in
relation to other virtual appliances (or physical machines) that
it is networked to. As appliances rather than software packages,
they are designed to be nearly functional out of the box, with
some basic configuration usually performed through a web
interface but with most of the configuration pre-installed,
pre-set, and pre-tested. Virtual machines and virtual appliances
have been successfully used in commercial and educational
settings to provide instant infrastructure support, allowing users
to concentrate on what their tasks are to be rather than how
things work underneath – in other words, well-designed virtual
appliances should function as turn-key devices, alleviating the
need for a given project to have a dedicated systems
administrator.
The purpose of this poster session, then, is to put forth the
concept of virtual appliances as an answer for the obstacle that
many digital editing projects face. I will create a set of virtual
appliances that can be deployed as a group—one will be a web
server, one a relational database server, one an XML database
server, one an XML transformer, and so forth—that forms the
core foundation of an online digital project. Each of the virtual
appliances is a configured “machine,” with only basic
information needing to be set through a web interface to each
of the pieces. A project hoping to utilize this group of virtual
appliances would perform the following steps:
1. A project will procure a physical machine.
2. The project will install the software to run the virtual
machines. In the case of this poster session, this will be
VMWare Server (free of charge), as VMWare is one of the
leaders in the development of virtual machine technology
(see<http://www.vmware.com/vmtn/applianc
es/faq.html>); however, conceptually, the same type
of virtual appliance network could be developed for the Xen
virtualization software.
3. The project will download the virtual appliances it chooses
onto the physical machine, one of which will be a central
control machine.
4. The project will use a web interface to the central control
machine to supply the relevant details—IP address, project
name, etc.
5. The project will then have an instant network of “servers”
that can act as a home for collaborative encoding storage,
database management, and web delivery of the materials to
be published.
Obviously, there are many issues that my proposal does not
seek to solve—projects will still have to worry about creating
materials, for example, or setting up a higher-level front end
for accessing the materials. But even these problems might,
down the road, find a solution in virtual appliance technology;
imagine, perhaps, that one of the virtual appliances in this
network runs a pre-configured installation of teiPublisher, thus
providing a repository management system for project
collaborators. Another virtual machine might have nothing on
it but Roma and some validators, and act as a localized (yet
still networked) project schema management system. A third
could have a turn-key wiki for collaborative documentation
writing.
By seeking to use virtualization technology and the concept of
ready-made, plug-and-play virtual machines, I hope to make
the world of digital editing and publishing available to a wider
range of scholars and users. This new model of “software”
distribution—treating infrastructure as appliances—will
eliminate many of the lower-level technical obstacles that
prevent too many good ideas from finding a home in the digital
world.
Page 134
Digital Humanities 2007
