rocessing information cognitively. In the Report
it is asserted that the “intellectual and practical skills that
students need are extensive, sophisticated and expanding with
the explosion of new technologies” (xi). Like the AACUReport,
Kellner too argues that traditional and specialized aspects of
education need to be overcome in order to develop alternative
pedagogies and multiple “literacies” to meet the challenges of
an interconnected global society. The study of interrelationships,
connectivity, transfer, and integration, leading to the
development of critical judgment, is proposed as the basis of
the new liberal curriculum in all disciplines of the humanities.
Page 32
Digital Humanities 2007
The five key concepts for the new curriculum are in fact not so
much concepts as they are markers of cognitive processes. As
such, the reform of higher education is to take place primarily
in terms of methodology of teaching. Given that “hypertext is
a mental process, as well as a digital tool” (Gilster, 137), and
the WWW is “an embodiment of human knowledge”(W3C),
exploring the relationships between cognition and technology
in the context of the new humanities and pedagogy can be
useful. I would like to suggest that the digital media offer a
useful concrete, but also a cognitive tool for teaching the five
processes that are to be the core of the new humanities. This
claim has theoretical and practical implications. Theoretically,
it calls for becoming more aware how the computer is altering
our ways of engaging with specific disciplinary questions
cognitively and methodologically (McCarty, 1). My concerns
in this paper, however, have to do with the practical applications
of the impact of digital media on cognition within the area of
the humanities. Practically, the claim calls for explicit
instruction within the context of each discipline in the methods
of organization andmanipulability that underlie the presentation
of material on the WWW.
The main vehicle of the digital media, the WWW, in its nature
embodies, illustrates and enables through its functioning all
four of the processes suggested as the basis for the new liberal
curriculum--interrelationships, connectivity, transfer, and
integration. By their very nature “the new media technologies
externalize and objectify reasoning” (Manovich, 59). The
WWW resists attempts at standard systematization, and
demonstrates the co-existence of and interrelationships between
multiple and apparently contradictory perspectives on a single
issue. One GOOGLE keyword search will retrieve hundreds
of documents linked by one single term, but applied variously
in different contexts, emphasizing the importance and nature
of connectivity, transfer and integration.
In relation to a given subject of inquiry or task, the non-linearity
in the presentation of material and ideas on the WWW
encourages “intentional” involvement on the part of learners,
as there is no longer one “solution” or a single “interpretation,”
but a variety, all situated within their own context and
knowledge. In order to find solutions to given questions or
problems, learners have to engage in a process of discovering
connections among apparently disparate materials and contexts,
then find ways of transferring and integrating parts of materials
into a new context. The WWW also offers alternative models
of grouping materials, such as scaffolding, and it promotes the
idea that conceptual knowledge cannot be separated from the
contexts in which it is represented (Wiles and Littlejohn, 2003;
Campbell, 2004; Cole, 2000; Carr, 1998;). The ready
availability of various information on theWWW turns research
and interpretation not so much into an exercise that depends
upon finding information, but one that strongly emphasizes
cognitive operations depending on critical thinking:
classification of it (finding meaningful interrelationships) and
making use of it (transferring it) by arranging it meaningfully
in a give context (integrating it). Scholarship and instruction
in the humanities has always relied on these processes; however,
with computer connectivity and the speed with which these
processes happen, the WWW amplifies them, enables them
“physically” and “on-demand” and thus makes them more
explicitly and self-consciously “teachable” than before.
In addition, because the WWW offers multiple presentations
of information, it illustrates that knowledge and heuristics are
not absolute, but situated within various communities of
knowing. Conceptually there is no “closure” or “ending” online,
but rather a constant process of evaluation of materials (Rhodes
and Sawday, 12) that are open to revisions, additions and
remodeling. Becoming aware of the implications the nature of
the WWW has for understanding what constitutes knowledge,
argument, opinion, analysis and interpretation, leads to the
development of critical discernment, evaluative capacity and
judgment.
While traditional “mass education tended to see life in a linear
fashion based on print models and developed pedagogies which
broke experience into discrete moments and behavioral bits,”
a new critical pedagogy of the digital humanities could produce
skills that “enable individuals to better navigate the multiple
realm and challenges of contemporary life” (Kellner, 9).Making
the WWW, its capabilities and operating functions explicit
models of intentional learning can help educators in the digital
humanities illustrate how knowledge in the humanities is
positively affected by the digital medium, and how the new
pedagogy leads to learning as an active, social process bound
up with experience connected with wider socio-political
paradigms of change.
Bibliography
Greater Expectations: A New Vision for Learning as a Nation
Goes to College: National Panel Report.Washington, D.C.:
Association of American Colleges and Universities, 2002. <h
ttp://www.greaterexpectations.org>
Campbell, Kathy. E-ffective Writing for E-Learning
Environments. Hershey, PA: Information Science Publishing,
2004.
Carr, Kevin Michael. Dissertation. University of Idaho, 1998.
Cole, Robert A., ed. Issues in Web-Based Pedagogy: a Critical
Primer . The Greenwood Educators Reference Collection.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2000.
Gilster, Paul. Digital Literacy. New York: John Wiley, 1997.
Page 33
Digital Humanities 2007
Kellner, Douglas. "Toward a Critical Theory of Education."
Democracy and Nature 9.1 (2003): 51-44.
Manovich, Lev. The Language of the New Media. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2001.
McCarty, Williard.We Would Know How We Know What We
Know: Responding to the Computational Transformation of
the Humanities. Accessed 2004-05-06. <http://digital
humanities.org/views/Essays/WMcCartyCompu
tationalTransformation>
Rhodes, Neil, and Jonathan Sawday, eds. The Renaissance
Computer: Knowledge Technology in the First Age of Print .
London: Routledge, 2000.
Wiles, Kathy, and Allison Littlejohn. "Supporting Sustainable
E-Learning: AUKNational Forum." Interact, Integrate, Impact:
Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference of the Auatralasian
Society for Computers in Learning in Tertairy Education. Ed.
G. Crisp, et al. Adelaide, Australia, 2003.
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). Definition of WWW.
retrieved from:<http://www.bitpipe.com/tlist/W
orld-Wide-Web.html>
ExpressingComplexAssociations
in Medieval Historical
Documents: The Henry III Fine
Rolls Project
Arianna Ciula (arianna.ciula@kcl.ac.uk)
Centre for Humanities Computing
King's College London
Paul Spence (paul.spence@kcl.ac.uk)
Centre for Humanities Computing
King's College London
José Miguel Vieira
Centre for Humanities Computing
King's College London
Gautier Poupeau
École Nationale des Chartes
Université Paris-Sorbonne
T his paper will focus on the use of technologiestraditionally associated with knowledgemanagement and
ontological representation to express complex associations
between entities in historical texts that have been marked up
in XML according to the Text Encoding Initiative guidelines.1
In particular, we will describe our exploration of the potential
use of RDF (Resource Description Framework)/OWL (Web
Ontology Language) technologies and will reflect on the role
of an ontology in facilitating the interpretation of implicit and
hidden associations in the sources, examining its use and limits
in a digital humanities project in connection with editing tools
and delivery issues.
We will demonstrate our findings based on the Henry III Fine
Rolls project,2 where an RDF ontology is being developed to
make explicit information about person, place and subject
entities marked up as “instances” in the core texts themselves.
The Henry III Fine Rolls project and
the need for authority lists
T he Henry III Fine Rolls is a three-year collaborativeproject between King's College London and the National
Page 34
Digital Humanities 2007
Archives (UK) that aims to represent the complexity of a
historical object known as the 'fine rolls' which chart offers of
money made to King Henry III of England in exchange for a
wide range of concessions and favours. A total of 64 rolls
containing around 800 parchment membranes, one for almost
all of the fifty-six years of Henry III’s reign from 1216-72,
survive in the UK National Archives.3 Each fine roll was
compiled in Latin by a handful of scribes and taken as a body
of documentary evidence, the rolls are of “prime importance
in the study of political, social, and economic history and of
government and administration at a local and national level.”4
The project will cover the first thirty-two years of Henry III’s
reign down to 1248 and will result in both print and digital
editions of the rolls, using as a model the format of the
traditional printed 'calendar' (an English summary of records,
plus a set of indices) in connection with the digitised images
of the rolls themselves. The digital edition will have a
sophisticated search interface and both print and digital editions
will provide a series of indices for people, places and subjects
that include complex associations between the various entries.
The core texts were encoded in XML using the TEI guidelines
and include mark-up related to some aspects of the physical
structure of the rolls as material artefacts.5 Particular attention
has been given in the mark-up to the occurrences of names of
persons, places and institutions. Furthermore, the project
researchers have identified and marked-up relevant subjects in
the fine rolls. Therefore, while the general mark-up in TEI XML
provides a framework for theoretical analysis and practical
encoding of the text of the calendar as it is being edited and
summarised in English, the need for additional modelling has
emerged so as to:
• associate textual instances of the same person, subject
occurrence or place to their correspondent logical authority
—whether that be a person (identified or anonymous), a
subject class or a place;
• express the mutual relationships between the relevant
authorities (e.g. individuals, locations, institutions and
subjects).
Why RDF/OWL?
I n previous work on projects requiring an expression of theassociations between sources in core texts marked up using
TEI XML we have taken more traditional approaches using
XML structures or relational databases to solve the problem,
but have increasingly found these wanting. There has been
some research in the TEI community in this area lately,
particularly around 'biographical and prosopographical data'6,
but at the time of writing this was not mature enough for us to
make a commitment to using it and in any case our attention
was drawn to other standards whose main objectives are closer
to what we are trying to achieve.
After conducting a comparative evaluation of possible standards
to create authority lists structures that included research into
RDF/OWL, Topic Maps and MADS (Metadata Authority
Description Schema), we opted for RDF/OWL.
The main reasons for this choice were the following:7
• RDF/OWL models provide a logical organisation of data
together with the possibility of a flexible manipulation of
meanings (e.g. rich expression of relationships among
objects/entities mentioned in the source text, where an
object/entity might be a person, a place or a subject);
• RDF/OWL decreases ambiguity by identifying unique
entities independently from their instances in a decentralised
way.
While the more practical advantages are that:
• as a set of standards which are at the heart of the Semantic
Web, RDF/OWL is internationally recognised and supported
- its models could facilitate the interconnection between
humanities computing projects in general and between
directly related data in particular;
• there is a relatively good selection of tools for RDF/OWL
compared to the other technologies that we have explored;
• RDF/OWL can be expressed in XML format, thus allowing
the re-purposing of data for web delivery (e.g. creation of
indices through the use of XSLT).
Ontology: Structure, Tool and
Delivery
T he RDF schema and OWL are used to define theknowledge domain around the core materials on the
project (the fine rolls) using classes and predicates. Already
existing predicates are used as extensively as possible (e.g.
CIDOC-CRM, Dublin Core, Friend of a Friend, Simple
Knowledge Organization System).
The connection between the TEI source files and the ontology
play an important role in our model.8 Indeed the XML files not
only feed the ontology with some data (e.g. variants of a certain
person name), but they are themselves part of the ontological
model. The fact that they exhibit names and assert facts related
to those names can be modelled in the ontology together with
the statement that a person name (proper name or in general
reference string) is associated to a specific person as an instance
of the entity person (e.g. that has a gender, a possible status
etc.). Quoting Eide,9 we include “explicit statements of the
sources of the assertions exhibited in the text”:
Page 35
Digital Humanities 2007
The concrete connection between the XML files and the
ontology is maintained through the use of identifiers, as in the
example below:
<persName key="arsic_robert"> Robert Arsic
< / p e r s N a m e >  →  < f r h 3 : M a n
rdf:ID="arsic_robert"> … </frh3:Man>
Evidently, the value and granularity of the ontology depends
on various factors, which include the richness of the source
files themselves (e.g. how well do the fine rolls express the
reality of the roles/occupations in the thirteenth century?), the
specific interests of the researchers (e.g. in the types of fines
rather than in the amount of money they keep record of) and
the definability of the knowledge domain itself (as shown in
the contrast between the identification of individuals and the
much more blurred identification of subjects).
In addition to expressing complex associations in an abstract
intellectual sense, it was also crucial to the project to create a
system endowed with sophisticated facilities for editing and
final publication. We will describe our experience in creating
such tools, in particular taking into account such project
requirements as:
• the facilities for managing/editing data: the addition of new
information, new classes/predicates/literal values; the
definition of relationships between entries, the possibility
to merge instances of classes or subclasses (e.g. while
editing we may realise that person A and B are actually the
same);
• the connection and synchronisation between the ontology
structure and data on the one hand, and the TEI source files
on the other (e.g. links from classes in authority list to actual
references to those classes as exhibited in the mark-up);
• the facility to browse information alphabetically or
categorised in some way (e.g. by date, county, role, kind of
relation) and to search for particular associations as
expressed in the ontology (e.g. all the locations connected
to the person called 'Robert Arsic' or all the relatives of
Robert Arsic).
Conclusions
I n the case of the fine rolls (as is true of many projectsinvolving complex primary sources) it is not enough to
mark-up an occurrence of a person name if you wish to create
complex indices or to create structured search functions.
Moreover, an authority-based approach is essential in order to
make the resource interoperable; external authority lists are
needed to record information in a systematic, comprehensive
and possibly standardised way, so as to:
• store additional information related to persons, places and
subject (exhibited andmarked up as corresponding instances
in the TEI XML files);
• make explicit the multiple connections between places,
persons and subjects;
• merge or disambiguate identifications and eventually correct
the original mark-up of the rolls.
Our paper will describe how, for the Henry III Fine Rolls
project, an RDF/OWL ontology was used to model complex
associations and how this has assisted the project researchers
in the interpretation of the material they are editing and
facilitated the production of a digital resource that will allow
future users to browse the material under different perspectives,
to explore the relationships among mentioned individuals,
locations and subjects, and to foster new understandings.
1. <http://www.tei-c.org>
2. <http://www.frh3.org.uk>
3. <http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/>
4. Dryburgh, Paul. “Henry III Fine Rolls Project” (paper presented
at the Institute of Historical Research, London , February, 9, 2006).
5. For a more detailed presentation of the mark-up model see Ciula,
Arianna. “Searching the Fine Rolls: A Demonstration of the
Electronic Version” (paper presented at the InternationalMedieval
Congress, University of Leeds, July 10-13, 2006).
6. See “Biographical and Prosopographical Data”. In
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., and Burnard, Lou, eds. "TEI P5
Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange". <ht
tp://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-d
oc/html/ND.html#NDPERS> (accessed 15 November
2006).
Page 36
Digital Humanities 2007
7. OWL is a language developed on top of RDF by W3C to write
ontologies. For W3C RDF specifications on RDF see <http:
//www.w3.org/RDF/>. For an overview and further
resources on OWL see <http://www.w3.org/2001/s
w/>
8. For a similar approach see Eide, Øyvind and Ore, Christen-Emil.
“TEI, CIDOC-CRM and a Possible Interface between the Two”
(paper presented at Digital Humanities 2006, Université
Paris-Sorbonne, July 5-9, 2006) <http://www.allc-ac
h2006.colloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.p
df>.
9. Eide, Øyvind. “The Exhibition Problem. A Real Life Example
with a Suggested Solution” (paper presented at Digital Humanities
2006, Université Paris-Sorbonne, July 5-9, 2006) <http://w
ww.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-sorbonn
e.fr/DHs.pdf>.
Bibliography
Boot, Peter. "Decoding Emblem Semantics." Literary &
Linguistic Computing 21(Supplement 1) (2006): 15-27.
Ciula, Arianna. "Searching the Fine Rolls: A Demonstration
of the Electronic Version." Paper presented to the International
Medieval Congress 2006, University of Leeds, July 10-13,
2003.
Dryburgh, Paul. "Henry III Fine Rolls Project." Paper presented
to the Institute of Historical Research, London , February 9,
2006.
Eide, Øyvind. "The Exhibition Problem. A Real Life Example
with a Suggested Solution." Paper presented at Digital
Humanities 2006, Université Paris-Sorbonne, July 5-9, 2006.
Abstract available at <http://www.allc-ach2006.co
lloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf> (accessed
15 November 2006).
Eide, Øyvind, and Christian-Emil Ore. "TEI, CIDOC-CRM
and a Possible Interface between the Two." Paper presented at
Digital Humanities 2006, Université Paris-Sorbonne, July 5-9,
2006. Abstract available at <http://www.allc-ach200
6.colloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf>
(accessed 15 November 2006).
Poupeau, Gautier. "De l’index nominum à l’ontologie. Comment
mettre en lumière les réseaux sociaux dans les corpus
historiques numériques?" Paper presented at Digital Humanities
2006, Université Paris-Sorbonne, July 5-9, 2006. Abstract
available at <http://www.allc-ach2006.colloque
s.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf>(accessed 15
November 2006).
Spence, Paul. "The Henry III Fine Rolls Project." Paper
presented at Digital Humanities 2006, Université
Paris-Sorbonne, July 5-9, 2006. Abstract available at <http:
//www.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-sorbon
ne.fr/DHs.pdf> (accessed 15 November 2006).
"Biographical and Prosopographical Data." TEI P5: Guidelines
for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Ed. C. M.
Sperberg-McQueen and Lou Burnard. Accessed 2006-11-15.
<http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-
doc/html/>
Tuohy, Conal. "Using XMLTopicMaps to Present TEI." Paper
presented at the 5th TEIMeeting, Sofia, Octobery 28-29, 2005.
Page 37
Digital Humanities 2007
