Scholarly (R)evolution: Roles of
E-texts in the Research Process
in the Humanities
Suzana Sukovic (suzana.sukovic@uts.edu.au)
University of Technology, Sydney
Introduction
T he study on the roles of electronic texts (e-texts) in theresearch process in the humanities investigates how
academics in literary and historical studies work with electronic
textual resources and how interaction with electronic texts
affects their research processes. It is situated in the context of
discussions about the cultural revolution triggered by the
development of digital media. The common comparison with
the print revolution suggests that textual sources are at the centre
of the change, which is particularly significant for scholars in
the humanities. Since text is the basic working material for
research in the humanities, the provision of text in an adequate
electronic form is crucial for qualitatively new applications of
computer technology in humanistic disciplines. At the same
time, an understanding of scholars’ interactions with e-texts is
critical for decisions on how to present existing sources and
for any work on further developments.
In his seminal book, Radiant Textuality, Jerome McGann talks
about the ‘material revolution’ in which we reconceive the
entity of our cultural archive of materials. Since these
repositories provide the basis for all traditional scholarly work,
institutional changes have been having a radical effect on the
traditional scholarship (McGann 2001). The acceptance of
digital resources in the humanities has not been as clear and as
decisive as in sciences, but reports from different countries over
the last few years point to a positive shift in the quantity and
quality of scholars’ engagement with information and
communication technologies (Houghton, Steele, and Henty
2003; TheBritishAcademy 2005; AmericanCouncil of Learned
Societies 2006)
A range of studies explored the information behaviour of the
humanities scholar; some were focused on the use of digital
resources in the humanities but none dealt primarily with the
use of electronic texts. Several studies have been conducted,
dealing briefly with the use of electronic texts as part of a
broader investigation (Massey-Burzio 1999; Brockman et al.
2001) or surveying the use of a particular electronic resource
(Flanders 1998; Porter 1998; Duff and Cherry 2000; Cherry
and Duff 2002). The literature suggests that electronic texts,
while much appreciated by those who use them, have not
become widely accepted, even in disciplines that are heavily
based on textual studies (Warwick 1999; Brockman et al. 2001).
Studies of citation patterns, such as Graham’s investigation of
citations in historians’ professional publications, show that
electronic resources do not rate highly in published works
(Graham 2000, 2001). However, citation patterns may indicate
intellectual exchanges to some extent, but they are not an
accurate reflection of the use of electronic resources. Palmer
(2005) points out that there are scholars who have begun to
create digital resources for themselves, which is one of the
indications of how scholars wish to engage new technologies
in their research.
There is a gap in our knowledge about the roles of electronic
texts in the research process so we need to explore various
aspects of scholars’ interactions with e-texts and explain how
these interactions contribute to the research process.
Methodology
T he exploratory study on the roles of electronic text in theresearch enquiry used qualitative methodology to
investigate research projects in which e-texts have been used
and the nature of academics’ interactions with these texts. The
following research questions guided the development of the
study:
1. How do academic researchers in literary and historical
studies work with electronic texts?
• How and for what purposes do researchers interact with
electronic texts?
• How do researchers think and feel about the research
context in which they work with e-texts?
2. How are the interactions with e-texts integrated in the
research process?
3. What is the contribution of e-texts to the research process?
4. What are the obstacles and aids in engagement with
electronic texts?
The study has dealt with the use of electronic texts as a resource
and tool, as opposed to projects that aim to produce electronic
textual editions or enhance electronic texts in any way. The
participants saw their work as traditional humanities research
or discussed their projects aiming to have traditional outputs.
Investigated research projects were in the areas of literary and
historical studies, because both fields are known for extensive
and sophisticated use of textual resources. Participants from
six universities in twoAustralian cities and one participant from
Page 207
Digital Humanities 2007
a university in the USA (altogether 16 participants) participated
in the study and discussed thirty research projects.
The term ‘electronic text’ in this study means any textual
material in electronic form, used as a primary source in literary
and historical studies. Primary materials are usually poetry,
stories, novels, plays, and a variety of historical documents —
government, public or private. Digitised archival copies of
magazines and newspapers, as well as web-sites and blogs,
could be electronic texts as defined here when they are used as
primary sources. Electronic texts could be written or spoken
(e.g., oral histories), digitised or created electronically,
stand-alone documents or part of electronic databases and
editions.
The study has had two phases. The first phase included in-depth
semi-structured interviews, examination of participants’
manuscripts and published works as well as examination of
some e-texts they mentioned during interviews. The second
phase involved detailed data-gathering from a small group of
academics drawn from the participants in the first phase. The
grounded theory techniques described by Strauss (1987), Strauss
and Corbin (1998a; 1998b) and Glaser (1998) were used for
data analysis.
Roles of e-texts
T his paper presents findings directly related to roles ofe-texts in the research process but the understanding of
the roles is based on other findings that emerged from the study.
Firstly, scholars in the study perceived e-texts as fluid entities,
which combine different media and formats in a way that does
not match the traditional divisions of library materials. The
perceived fluidity of electronic textuality leads to converging
and transformed practices of networking and information
searching. These practices combine aspects of networking,
chaining, browsing andweb-surfing in traditional and newways
so that the pattern of a new information behaviour emerges. I
called this new practice netchaining (Sukovic 2006).
The roles of e-texts are based to a large extent on working with
e-texts as fluid entities. Four main roles of e-texts in the research
process emerged from the study.
1. Support in finding documents and information. Search
capabilities combined with the provision of full text documents
provide a powerful aid in information discovery. E-texts provide
support in information retrieval and discovery of primary
materials; they lead to other sources and aid in working with
analogue sources; supplement hard copies and contribute to the
current awareness.
This is the most fundamental role. Not only do information
discovery and retrieval provide a basis for all other roles, but
the nature of scholars’ interaction with e-texts during the
retrieval determines other roles to a large extent (Role 3, for
example).
2. Aid in managing the research process. Access to e-texts
allows scholars to plan visits to remote collections; aids the
publication process and provides sources for some research
activities (e.g., ordering digital images, confirming publication
rights, and exchanging files with collaborators and publishers).
3. Aid in investigation of the topic. The multiplicity of sources,
formats and textual information that could be quickly brought
together is a basis of exploration that allows scholars to see
different meanings and aspects of the topic. Exploration of
research questions through interactions with e-texts took four
main forms:
• exploration of patterns and connections by searching and
comparing diverse bodies of electronic texts;
• production and/or interrogation of textual databases to
explore research questions;
• exploration of electronically born literature and
• exploration as part of the academic research to be used in
creative.
4. Contribution to writing and presenting research results. The
use of e-texts improves the speed and accuracy in writing by
allowing copying and pasting of passages. Interactions with
e-texts and digital media in general promote new, less structured
and linear ways of thinking about the topic, which influences
the academic writing style. From subtle changes in presenting
the argument to more radical combinations of academic and
creative writing styles, the participants reflected on different
ways in which electronic textuality was influencing their
traditional academic writing. Interactions with e-texts also
encourage thinking about alternative modes for presenting
research findings that do not fit traditional academic genres.
E-texts contribute to the final research stages in a complex
process of negotiation with the research tradition.
These roles serve two main functions:
• aid in providing basis for research (support roles) or
• aid in exploring the topic and presenting research findings
(substantive roles).
E-texts provide basis for research, or play support roles, when
they make some aspects of the research process quicker and
easier. The speed and convenience, or frustration sometimes
associated with working with electronic sources, may influence
the process, but they normally do not affect the scholar’s
intellectual engagement with the topic in a significant way. The
first two roles, Support in finding information and Aid in
managing research process, are support roles. The fourth,
Contribution to writing and presenting research results, plays
Page 208
Digital Humanities 2007
a support role when e-texts help in improving the speed and
accuracy.
E-texts aid in exploring the topic and presenting research
findings, or play substantive roles, when they take part in
shaping the scholar’s thinking process. Interactivity is an
essential element in following hunches, testing hypotheses and
making connections in a way that was impossible or impractical
without e-texts. The scholar’s thinking about the topic develops
in the interplay with the e-text and this experience can influence
the presentation of research results. The third role, Aid in
investigation of the topic, is a substantive content-oriented role.
In Contribution to writing and presenting research results,
e-texts have a substantive role when they influence the writing
style and presentation of research results.
Conclusion
U nderstanding of the roles of e-texts in the research processcontributes to our understanding of the envisaged
scholarly change as well as information needs and behaviour
in the humanities. It confirms the recent reports on the change
of research practices resulting from the use of ICTs and explores
the impacts of interactions with e-texts on the research process.
The study can have practical implications for the development
of digital collections and software applications, approaches to
text encoding and development of training programs and
institutional policies.
Bibliography
American Council of Learned Societies’ Commission on
Cyberinfrastructure for Humanities and Social Sciences. Our
Cultural Commonwealth: the report of the American Council
of Learned Societies’ Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for
Humanities and Social Sciences. 2006. Accessed 2006-08-12.
<http://www.acls.org/cyberinfrastructure/
acls.ci.report.pdf>
British Academy. E-resources for Research in the Humanities
and Social Sciences: A British Academy Policy Review.London:
The British Academy, 2005.
Brockman,William S., Laura Neumann, Carole L. Palmer, and
Tonyia J. Tidline. Scholarly Work in the Humanities and the
Evolving Information Environment.Washington, D.C.: Digital
Library Federation and Council on Library and Information
Resources, 2001. Accessed 2006-06-30. <http://www.cl
ir.org>
Cherry, JoanM., andWendyM. Duff. "StudyingDigital Library
Users Over Time: A Follow-up Survey of Early Canadiana
Online." Information Research 7.2 (2002). Accessed
2002-06-06.<http://informationr.net/ir/7-2/p
aper123.html>
Duff, Wendy M., and Joan M. Cherry. "Use of Historical
Documents in a Digital World: Comparisons with Original
Materials and Microfiche." Information Research 6.1 (2000).
Accessed 2004-05-20. <http://informationr.net/i
r/6-1/paper86.html>
Flanders, Julia. " Scholarly Research and Electronic Resources."
WWP Newsletter 4.2 (1998). Accessed 2004-05-28. <http:
//www.wwp.brown.edu/project/newsletter/vo
l04num02/scholarly042.html>
Glaser, Barney G. Doing Grounded Theory: Issues and
Discussions.Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press, 1998.
Graham, Suzanne R. "Historians and Electronic Resources: A
Citation Analysis." Journal of the Association for History and
Computing 3.3 (2000).
Graham, Suzanne R. "Historians and Electronic Resources: A
Second Citation Analysis." Journal of the Association for
History and Computing 4.2 (2001).
Houghton, John W., Colin Steele, and Margaret Henty.
Changing Research Practices in the Digital Information and
Communication Environment. [Canberra?]: Department of
Education, Science and Training, 2003. Accessed 2005-05-11.
<http://www.dest.gov.au/sectors/research_
sector/publications_resources/profiles/ch
anging_research_practices.htm>
Massey-Burzio, Virginia. "The Rush to Technology: A View
from the Humanities." Library Trends 47.4 (1999): 620–639.
McGann, Jerome.Radiant Textuality: Literature After theWorld
Wide Web. New York: Palgrave, 2001.
Palmer, Carole L. "Scholarly Work and the Shaping of Digital
Access." Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology 56.11 (2005): 1140-1153.
Porter, Sarah. "Reports from the Front: Six Perspectives on
Scholar's Information Requirements in the Digital Age." The
New Review of Academic Librarianship 4 (1998): 167–189.
Strauss, Anselm. Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1987.
Strauss, Anselm, and Juliet Corbin. Basics of Qualitative
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory. 1987. Second Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications, 1998.
Strauss, Anselm, and Juliet Corbin. "Grounded Theory
Methodology: An Overview." Strategies of Qualitative Inquiry.
Ed. N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications, 1998.
Page 209
Digital Humanities 2007
Sukovic, Suzana. " Electronic Texts in the Humanities:
Converging Media, Formats, Practices and Ideas.." Paper read
at IR 7.0: Internet Convergences, presented by the Association
of Internet Researchers (AoIR), at Brisbane, 27–30 September.
2006. Accessed 2006-10-24. <http://conferences.ao
ir.org/index.php?cf=5>
Warwick, Claire. "English Literature, Electronic Text and
Computer Analysis: An Impossible Combination? ." Paper read
at ACH-ALLC '99 International Humanities Computing
Conference, June 9-13, at Charlottesville, Virginia. 1999.
Accessed 2002-04-05. <http://InformationR.net/i
r/5-2/paper71.html>
