Up-To-Date Means of Access to
Full-Text Databases
Roman M. Gnutikov (romashka@uni.udm.ru)
Urdmurtia State University
Victor A. Baranov (baranov@udm.ru)
Izhevsk State Technical University
Introduction
A mong mankind’s priceless treasures are not onlyhandmade artefacts but also creations reflecting
mankind’s ability of thinking and speaking. These are texts.
Thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of
manuscripts created during the past thousands years that reached
our days are of great historic, artistic and cultural value. There
is no doubt that written texts were and remain one of the most
valuable witnesses of the past of mankind, its achievements
and discoveries, world view, sufferings and errors.
It is well known that natural human language and texts in natural
language, accordingly, are among the most complicated things
for study and interpretation. The complexity increases several
times for old texts.
One of the most effective means of preserving and increasing
knowledge of old texts is the steady philological, historical and
textual study of and commentary on them using themanuscripts.
Unfortunately, the major part of the world manuscript heritage
is in need of the comprehensive study. Many manuscripts are
unpublished and inaccessible.
Objectives
U p-to-date computer technologies offer wide possibilitiesfor preservation, processing, study and popularisation of
the manuscript cultural heritage of mankind. The most
promising method of comprehensive study of manuscripts is
the creation of digital libraries in the form of full-text databases.
The advantages of this type of collection are the volume of
stored information, speedy search, advanced data retrieval and
ordering functionality, the ability to supplement the database
with new information and the ability to access it through the
Internet
Page 71
Digital Humanities 2007
The weaknesses of full-text databases are their complexity and
the expenditure of labour required to access the manuscript/text
and its components. The depth of fragmentation, number and
composition of units, their properties and values all must be
determined beforehand, so the text is considerably simplified
and the means of establishing relationships between fragments
can be absent.
While developing the Manuscript system 1 (<http://manu
scripts.ru/index_en.html>) intended for storage,
processing and publication of ancient manuscripts, the research
group of philologists and programmers at Udmurtia State
University developed a uniquemodule for accessing the full-text
database: a specialised text editor called OldEd. Its distinctive
feature is its combination of the functions of traditional text
processors with their visual presentation of text and formatting
capabilities, with the ability to build a corresponding
object-oriented database for each textual unit, which can be
combined into relationship hierarchies.
As is well known, text processors likeMicrosoft Word are well
suited to extension using their powerful object model and
therefore provide a means of interaction with databases as an
interface to it (in this case, with full-text databases of ancient
texts). However an analysis of such a means of interacting with
the database using Microsoft Word showed that the
development of our own tools for editing Old Russian texts
stored in the database would be considerably less
labour-consuming than customizing Microsoft Word or other
software
Methodology
T o work with data stored in full-text databases, it isadvisable to create special editors. In the process of
developing the OldEd editor, our research group was guided
by the following requirements:
1. creation, input and editing of the document through direct
interaction with the database;
2. representation of the manuscript text in a form that would
be close to the original, including reproduction of glyph
variants (Figure 1);
3. selection and creation of the manuscript/text units and
manipulation of their properties and values (Figure 2);
4. work with unit relationships (creation, change of
subordination, deletion, change of properties, visualization
of relationships);
5. work with various hierarchical structures (unit selection,
creation of the relationship with the parent unit etc.) and
representation of unit relationships in the hierarchy as a tree
(Figure 3);
6. work with unit dictionaries, their properties and values and
relationships (Figure 4);
7. support for simultaneous work with several manuscripts;
8. multi-user support.
Figure 1: : Many texts, many languages and accurate reproduction of glyphs
Figure 2: Text units, their properties and values
Figure 3: Text fragments and their dictionary equivalents
Page 72
Digital Humanities 2007
Figure 4: Hierarchic representation of units
Technological description
F rom a technical point of view, the editor comprises a rangeof components providing access to data, the ability to read
and record objects into the database, visualisation of the units
of the manuscripts/texts and their hierarchical relationships,
and representation of the document in the form of formatted
text.
The editor was written in C++, and the components were
developed with the use of ATL (Active Template Library). The
client part was written using MFC (Microsoft Foundation
Classes). In operation the client interacts with the database of
the Manuscript system by means of a server API-procedure
written as packages for theOracle databasemanagement system.
Results and Business benefits
T he smallest unit that can be operated on by the editor isthe glyph and its variants. The largest units are the
manuscript and text. It should be noted that the relationships
among the latter could be described by the notion ‘many to
many’: the manuscript can have many texts; one text can be
represented in many manuscripts.
The OldEd editor allows the user to work effectively with the
visualised data – units, their relationships, properties and values
– of texts/manuscripts. The editor enables representation of the
hierarchies existing in a text/manuscript and of the text as a
transformed geometrical hierarchy. When working with the
text, the editor allows the user to edit the text and divide it into
fragments. When scrolling, the editor displays information on
the relationships between the text units, structural units and
dictionary units; allows creation and deletion of relationships
between units; allows viewing and correction of their properties
and allows creation of new units (including texts). When
displaying relationships, the user can view and edit all unit
relationships.
Further steps
T he editor’s functional possibilities are being expanded inseveral directions:
• Since working with the editor currently requires a constant
connection with the database, it would be desirable to have
a feature allowing the user to download part of the document
and work with it offline.
• The present version of the editor could be used with a direct
remote connection to the database, but this is not allowed
only for security reasons. This is why the database
management system is currently behind a firewall and
inaccessible from outside of the local network. This situation
should be changed, as the value of the system considerably
increases if many researchers can access it not only to
acquire information, but also to enrich the database. To
achieve this goal, a new additional web interface to data
using the SOAP protocol should be developed. Information
on the ancient hand-written treasures stored in the database
is already accessible through a special web-interface in
viewing mode (as an illustration see our site devoted to the
Putyata’s Menaion manuscript <http://manuscript
s.ru/mns/portal.main?p1=19&p_lid=2&p_si
d=1>).
Conclusions
T he editor provides features for working with full-textdatabases: the text/manuscript and their units are
represented in a view that is close to the original; the
text/manuscript can be divided into fragments described by
their respective properties and values; units belonging to the
same content area can be organized in a hierarchy; any unit can
have a standard variant (corresponding dictionary unit);
relationships can be established between any units (even distant
ones); and editing of units, their properties, values and
relationships can be done by the user directly in the text. In
other words, the digital copy of the manuscript/text can be
represented not like a linear chain of units, but like a complex
network, each part of which is a model of a certain area of
information in the manuscript. All editor features are intended,
first of all, so that versatile operations can be performed on
manuscripts/texts for further processing of them in the
databases, preparation of reference materials and creation of
printed and digital editions.
Page 73
Digital Humanities 2007
One of the most important advantages of the editor is that it
allows simple, consistent visual manipulation of the various
units of structurally complexmanuscripts and texts so that users
do not need to learn difficult markup languages
For more detail about the editor see <http://manuscrip
ts.ru/pub/rd/>.
Acknowledgment
T he work wasmade possible thanks to the financial supportof the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Grant
05-07-90217-в).
1. Baranov, V.A., Votintsev, A.A., Gnutikov, R.M., Mironov, A.N.,
Oshchepkov, S.V., and Romanenko, V.A., "Old SlavicManuscript
Heritage: Electronic Publications and Full-Text Databases" EVA
2004 London (Electronic Imaging, the Visual Arts Conference &
Beyond). Conference Proceedings. University College London,
Institute of Archaeology. Principal Editor: James Hemsley.
London, 2004.
Baranov, V.A., Votintsev, A.A., Gnutikov, R.M., Zuga, O.V.,
Mironov, A.N., Nikiforova, S.A., Oshchepkov, S.V. Romanenko,
V.A., and Ryabova, E.V. (2003) "Electronnyje izdanija drevnikh
pis’mennykh pamjatnikov i tekhnologija sozdanija polnotekstovykh
baz dannykh (Electronic Editions of Old Manuscripts and
Technology of Creation of Full-Text Databases)." Krug idej:
electronnye resursy istoricheskoj informatiki, Мoscow, pp.
234–260.
Baranov, V.A., Votintsev, A.A., Gnutikov, R.M., Mironov, A.N.,
and Romanenko, V.A., (2003) "Spetsializirivannyj tekstovyj
redactor “Manuscript” Sistemy obrabotki drevnikh rukopisej
(Specialized Text Editor Manuscript of the System for Processing
OldManuscripts)." Informatsionnyj bjulleten’ assotsiatsii “Istorija
i komp’juter 31: 159-165.
