Zeta and Iota and
Twentieth-Century American
Poetry
David L. Hoover (david.hoover@nyu.edu)
New York University
I n his intriguing “All the Way Through: Testing forAuthorship in Different Frequency Strata”, John F. Burrows
follows up his much-discussed Delta (Burrows, 2002a, 2002b,
2003; Hoover 2004a, 2004b, 2006) with two new measures of
textual difference: Zeta and Iota (Burrows 2006; see also
Burrows 2005).
Bothmeasures begin with a full word frequency list for a sample
of Restoration poetry (approximately 20,000 words) by a single
primary author. The sample is then divided into five sections
of equal size, and word frequency lists are created for them.
Zeta deals with words of moderate frequency, words occurring
in at least three of the five sections. To compare two poets, the
word list is reduced further by removing any occurring more
than three times in the second poet’s sample. Where many
authors are being compared, the list is reduced by removing
any words present in the text samples of most of the other
authors. Both methods remove from consideration the most
frequent words of English that have been the focus of so much
recent work. Whether there are two or many authors, the result
is a list of words that are moderately frequent in the primary
author but much less frequent in the other author(s).
For Iota, the word list is first limited to words appearing in at
most two of the primary author’s sections. To compare two
authors, the list is further limited to words that are completely
absent from the second author’s sample. Where many authors
are being compared, the list is further reduced by removing
words that appear in more than half the other authors. In either
case, very frequent and moderately frequent words are
eliminated, leaving words that are not very frequent in the
primary author but are rare or non-existent in the other author(s).
Zeta and Iota are remarkably effective in attributing poems as
short as 1,000 words to the correct authors. Even more
important, they allow the analyst to concentrate on a relatively
small subset of characteristic words, nearly all content words.
These lead back to the text and to important questions of
interpretation and style.
Both Zeta and Iota will require further testing before they can
be confidently applied to genuine questions of authorship and
Page 77
Digital Humanities 2007
style, and we can begin with a study of twentieth-century poetry.
For these tests my corpus consists of samples of 14,000 to
129,000 words of poetry by twenty-six poets as the primary set
and fifty-six independent poems from 900 to 21,000 words long
as the secondary set, thirty-six of these by poets in the primary
set and twenty by other poets (poems by primary authors are
removed from their main samples). The texts were downloaded
from Chadwyck-Healey’s Literature Online and edited to
regularize hyphens and to remove prose sections and
non-authorial text, such as publication information, notes,
section numbers, epigrams and other quotations. Delta tests
were used to determine which of the poems and poets are most
difficult to attribute, and these were analyzed using Zeta and
Iota.
My head-to-head tests of Wallace Stevens vs Archibald
MacLeish and Edwin Arlington Robinson vs Robert Frost give
even more definitive results than Burrows achieves for Marvell
vs Waller, though my much larger samples require minor
adjustments in technique). The newmeasures have no difficulty
distinguishing the two poets, whichever poet’s word list is used.
When Burrows tests Marvell and Waller (using each poet’s
own primary word list) against the samples and twenty-four
independent poems by twenty-four other main authors and
twenty-one poems by other authors, Iota works very well for
both authors, and Zeta works based on Waller’s list. Marvell’s
list produces a group of failures which Burrows suggests are
likely to be result from the contrast between the political satires
being tested and the largely pastoral nature of most ofMarvell’s
poetry.
My tests using the primary word lists of eight different authors
yields strong results for Zeta on James Dickey, Vachel Lindsay,
Robert Frost, and Wallace Stevens, with all of their individual
poems ranking higher than any poem or sample by any other
author. Zeta is very successful on two of William Vaughn
Moody’s independent poems, but the third ranks far below
other author samples and individual poems, and it fails badly
when based on the word lists of Edwin Arlington Robinson,
Kenneth Rexroth, and Archibald MacLeish. For Iota, only the
lists of Stevens and Lindsay produce completely correct results,
though those ofMoody andRexroth produce good results except
for a single poem by each author. Further research into the
causes of these poorer results is underway, but the problems
with Iota may be related to my larger samples. (The definition
of “rare” is obviously very different for 20,000-word samples
and 120,000-word samples.)
One alteration of Zeta that produces perfect results using
Robinson’s word list not only limits the word list to words that
appear in at least three of the author’s five sections, but also
sets a lower limit on the word’s frequency in the main set and
limits the total frequency of the word in the twenty-five
counter-sets. Another, still under investigation, calculates the
standard deviation of the word’s frequency in the five base
sections and divides it by themean frequency. Sorting the word
list on the resulting Coefficient of Variation (or Relative
Standard Deviation) makes it easy to limit the list to words that
appear at relatively consistent frequencies in the five sections,
besides appearing in at least three of them and in a limited
number of the counter-set samples. Aword appearing five times
in each of a poet’s five sections seems intuitively more
“characteristic” of the author than one appearing twenty-three
times in one section and once in each of two others.
Whatever the outcome of further testing and modification may
be, Zeta, especially, is very effective in focusing attention on
a poet’s characteristic words, a useful task in its own right. In
head-to-head tests on MacLeish and Stevens, much more
stringent stipulations than Burrows used produce fascinating
results: the twenty-six words occurring in all five sections of
MacLeish’s sample but with a frequency less than three in
Stevens’s sample are good potential MacLeish authorship
markers, and the same stipulations produce forty potential
Stevens authorship markers. These words range in rank within
their word lists from about the 200th to the 1,400th most
frequent. These two sets of marker words return our attention
to the texts:
Characteristic Stevens words rare in MacLeish:
reality, except, centre, element, colors, solitude, possible, ideas,
hymns, essential, imagined, nothingness, crown, inhuman,
motions, regard, sovereign, chaos, genius, glittering, lesser,
singular, alike, archaic, luminous, phrases, casual, voluble,
universal, autumnal, café, inner, reads, vivid, clearest, deeply,
minor, perfection, relation, immaculate
Characteristic MacLeish words rare in Stevens:
answered, knees, hope, ways, steep, pride, signs, lead, hurt,
sea’s, sons, vanish, wife, earth’s, lifted, they’re, swing, valleys,
fog, inland, catch, dragging, ragged, rope, strung, bark
Stevens’s words are longer and more abstract, especially the
nouns, and his list is saturated with adjectives. MacLeish’s list
has very few adjectives and more verbs and concrete nouns.
Searching for marker words in each poet’s work yields a
remarkable pair of short poems: MacLeish’s short poem
“‘Dover Beach’–A Note to that Poem” (215 words) contains
seven of his twenty-six marker words, including the three
italicized in this brief passage:
. . . It’s a fine and a
Wild smother to vanish in: pulling down---
Tripping with outward ebb the urgent inward.
Speaking alone for myself it’s the steep hill and the
Toppling lift of the young men I am toward now . . .
In his even shorter poem, “From the Packet of Anacharsis”
(144 words), six of Stevens’s forty marker words appear,
Page 78
Digital Humanities 2007
including the three italicized in this brief passage (internal
ellipsis in the original):
And Bloom would see what Puvis did, protest
And speak of the floridest reality . . .
In the punctual centre of all circles white
Stands truly. The circles nearest to it share
Its color . . .
Preventing the huge numbers of items being analyzed from
masking any meaningful results is one of the most difficult
challenges for quantitative analyses of literature. By selecting
for examination words that are particularly characteristic of an
author, Zeta and Iota are potentially very useful for literary
analysis as well as authorship attribution, nomatter what further
refinements they may require.
Bibliography
Burrows, John F. "Delta’: A Measure of Stylistic Difference
and a Guide to Likely Authorship." Literary & Linguistic
Computing 17.3 (2002a): 267-287.
Burrows, John F. "The Englishing of Juvenal: Computational
Stylistics and Translated Texts." Style 36 (2002b): 677-99.
Burrows, John F. "Questions of Authorship: Attribution and
Beyond." Computers and the Humanities 37 (2003): 5-32.
Burrows, John F. "Who Wrote Shamela? Verifying the
Authorship of a Parodic Text." Literary& Linguistic Computing
20.4 (2005): 437-450.
Burrows, John F. "All theWay Through: Testing for Authorship
in Different Frequency Strata." Literary & Linguistic
Computing (2006). Advanced Access published January 6,
2006
Hoover, David L. "Testing Burrow's Delta." Literary &
Linguistic Computing 19.4 (2004a): 453-475.
Hoover, David L. "Delta Prime?" Literary & Linguistic
Computing 19.4 (2004b): 477-495.
Hoover, David L. "Word Frequency, Statistical Stylistics, and
Authorship Attribution." Advanced ICT Methods Guide to
Linguistics. Ed. Tony McEnery. : , Forthcoming.
