
1 Introduction
‘People live, events occur, and artefacts are pro-
duced by human hand at specific locations. Much of
what people do is spatially determined or leaves
spatial signatures. Human feelings towards, and
engagement with, place and landscape are continu-
ally changing they cannot be situated only in the
present, for they contain and are referenced on what
has gone before’ (Bender, 2002).
Landscape has been likened to a palimpsest1 as all
past human activities have left their signature upon
the land each partially overwriting whatever has
gone before. In order to gain insight into human
activity, past or present, the influences of geography
and its interaction with society must be taken
into account. Information about place should there-
fore be an essential part of research in the human-
ities. Although digital tools make powerful new
methodologies for exploring spatial data freely avail-
able at relatively low cost the new research oppor-
tunities offered by spatial and spatial–temporal data
remain relatively unexplored. This article examines
possible reasons for this and discusses ways forward
for the digital humanities community.
Whenever mapping or digital research tools for
spatial data are being discussed, attention frequently
focuses immediately upon geographical information
systems (GIS). In this context, GIS are often seen as
mapping tools but the methodology they encapsu-
late is about much more than just digital cartog-
raphy; it gives the researcher the ability to analyse
and display data in a variety of maps, graphics,
networks or hierarchy trees as well as extending
database functionality to the investigation of spatial
relationships. It must also be remembered that GIS
is only one of the many digital tools for handling
spatial data that are available to scholars.
Correspondence:
Martyn Jessop
Centre for Computing in the
Humanities, King’s College
London, Strand, London
WC2R 2LS, UK.
E-mail:
martyn.jessop@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm041 Advance Access Published on 20 November 2007
39
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
For example, in the humanities, where historical
maps and texts are replete with place names but
precise spatial information is often limited, it is
often good practice to conceive of the development
of geographical information as beginning from
place names (a gazetteer) rather than geometry
(a GIS) (Mostern, 2006). The Geographical Infor-
mation Science methods that underpin GIS were
developed by earth scientists only later being
adopted by the social sciences and from there
permeating into social science history and thus
into the humanities. Although many of the com-
mon basic spatial tools can be used by the digital
humanist we also have one requirement that pushes
beyond the implementation of Geographical Infor-
mation Science present in existing software; namely,
the handling of time. The need to represent and
model time is leading humanities scholars to
experiment with the emerging related methodolo-
gies of dynamic mapping, an approach that was
difficult to implement before the advent of digital
tools (Jessop, 2006).
It is over fifteen years since GIS software of
reasonable functionality became available in a PC
environment at a relatively low cost. There are many
ways that methods and tools for structuring,
visualizing and analysing space, spatial behaviour,
and spatial relationships can benefit humanities
research but the use of geographical information
in digital scholarship by humanists remains very
limited. This article will explore some of the
potential but, possibly more importantly, it will
also examine why that potential is being developed
so slowly. The author believes there are many
reasons why geographical information is under-used
in humanities research; some reflect weaknesses in
the methodology and the technologies that currently
facilitate the study of geographical information but
possibly the most significant concern our scholarly
practices and institutions.
2 The Developing Role of GIS in
Humanities Research
The use of geographical information in humanities
research has passed through a sequence of phases of
development that are frequently seen during the
adoption of computational methods in a new field.
Initially, the technology was used to replicate pre-
existing methodologies and styles of work as in
projects such An Atlas of Victorian Mortality
(Woods and Shelton, 1997). This project produced
a printed publication comprising of largely standard
graphs and cartographic representations gathered
together in the form of an atlas of patterns of health
and death in Victorian England and Wales. In many
respects, it follows a tradition of social and cultural
atlases that stretches back to explosion of atlas
publication in the nineteenth Century (Wainer,
2005). In the next phase of development, the new
methods made available by GIS software were
applied to a variety of new disciplines. For example,
3D digital elevation models, traditionally the pre-
serve of physical geographers, have been used to
investigate how the effects of terrain, specifically the
gradient of new railway routes, balanced by chang-
ing economics, influenced the development of
railways in Victorian Britain (Schwartz, 2004).
Further examples include the use of digital dynamic
maps in projects such as the Valley of the Shadow2
and The Salem Witch Trial Documentary Archive.3
Currently, the boundaries of the more rigorously
quantitative methods are being pushed back as the
use of 3D and 4D work is explored.
The majority of the humanities research per-
formed with GIS has been quantitative in nature,
but recently there has been an increased interest in
the use of geographical information for more
qualitative work. Examples of this style of work
can be seen in projects at the Perseus Digital Library
(Smith et al., 2000), such as the Edwin C Bolles
Collection and the Boyle Papers. These projects make
use of traditional map materials and geographical
information but in a more qualitative way. The
Perseus project links together a number of different
digital libraries using geographical information as
an integration tool. This work covers a broad range
of activities linking texts, images and numerical data
to the places they describe via interactive maps to
produce immersive learning environments.
Geographical information also has considerable
potential for the discovery and delivery of informa-
tion. It can provide an unambiguous method for
M. Jessop
40 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
indexing and searching. Digital Library initiatives,
such as the Alexandria Digital Library,4 are the
focus of a great deal of work towards the develop-
ment of digital gazetteers and temporal directories
(Goodchild, 2004). These make it possible to trace
the history of a named place, link multiple names
for the same place, relate places to one another and
plot locations on maps. Such tools are essential to
humanist researchers who frequently have to span
name changes; for example, the Russian city of
Volgograd has changed its name from Tsaritsyn to
Stalingrad to Volograd in less than a century; there
are many border territories where there may be
language variations as well as place name changes
(Jessop, 2005). According to context, these tools
may be map based (as GIS or interactive images) or
place name based (as gazetteers). Recent work on
map based front-ends to digital text and image
collections has resulted in resource discovery tools
that are more intuitive and less culturally specific
than traditional textual indexing. Another impor-
tant function of these projects is to provide a forum
for the discussion and agreement of standards for
the creation of new resources, such as digital
gazetteers, and to ensure that information can be
exchanged freely between them (Jane´e et al., 2004).
The Alexandria Digital Library has produced stan-
dards for gazetteer content (Hill, 2004), a feature
type thesaurus, and a gazetteer service protocol
(Jane´e and Hill, 2003). Place names are frequently
problematic for archivists and organizations such as
the National Council on Archives (NCA) in the UK
have developed detailed rules to cope with them
(NCA, 1997). The trend in the digital humanities is
towards international inter-disciplinary projects but
there is some debate about whether the differing
requirements of each type of user means that a
universal standard for digital gazetteers, equally
useful to archivists, art historians and the general
public, is achievable (Southall, 2006).
Aside from the more practical problems of
creating digital resources of spatial data there are
also significant philosophical problems. Humanists
frequently work with diachronic data, which show
many changes of not just names but also of
boundaries. An example would be a theatre that
moves location but retains the same name; this is a
simple case but hints at far more complex issues.
When the boundaries or attributes of a place change
over time when do two places that have occupied
the same space cease to be the same place and
become two different places, and how is this
determined? An abundance of issues concerning
space and place need to be addressed.
Location and spatial relationships also exist in
data that does not have a geographical focus; for
example, as used by art historians to manage
restoration work on murals (Murariu and
Petrescu, 1999) and other artefacts. Areas on the
digital images of the artwork are associated with
notes and images concerning the restoration work
performed on them, and other relevant information;
all this combined information is then managed
using a GIS. There are now alternatives to using GIS
for this style of work, for example Pliny5 (developed
by John Bradley at CCH), which allows notes and
annotations to be attached to digital objects such as
images, pdf files and documents of various types.
Bradley describes Pliny as ‘a tool to support
widespread established (and non-digital) scholarly
research practice. It focuses on the scholarly acts of:
reading and reacting to that reading; and developing
an interpretation, which arises from that reading. It
aims to bring the benefits of computing to existing
scholarly practice rather than requiring the user to
adopt new strategies to benefit’6 The final remark
typifies an underlying philosophy for the develop-
ment of humanities computing tools; that they
build upon existing scholarly practice rather than
replace it. Moving away from physical space
altogether it can be useful for information designers
to introduce spatial relationships into situations
where no geographical space exists so that distance
acts as a proxy for strength of a relationship. By
organizing concepts and propositions in an abstract
visualization that shows non-intuitive spatial rela-
tionships between them, a diagram of shape and
form is produced that allows new links (relation-
ships) to be found or learning to be enhanced. The
concept map is an example of this style of diagram;
they are not only a powerful tool for capturing,
representing and archiving knowledge of indi-
viduals, but also for creating new knowledge
(Novak and Canas, 2006). Although somewhat
Geographical Information in Digital Humanities Scholarship
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 41
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
abstract, they do indicate the value of visualizing
spatial relationships even in areas where its existence
may not be immediately obvious or even absent
altogether.
3 Factors Inhibiting the Use of
Geographical Information in
the Digital Humanities
It is clear that geographical information has
immense potential for research and the delivery of
data. It can provide an unambiguous method for
indexing and searching information and offers the
opportunity to build resource discovery tools that
are more intuitive and less culturally specific than
traditional textual indexing. Despite this it has had
little effect in the digital humanities and the research
potential of working with digital tools for handling
spatial data has been explored in only very limited
contexts.
The author believes that there are four factors
affecting this inhibition of adoption of spatial
methodology in humanities scholarship. The first
and most fundamental concerns the use of data
visualization and images per se in the discourse-
based research methodology of the humanities. This
is a very significant issue but will not be addressed
here as it is beyond the focus of this article but will
be the topic of further work by the author. The
second aspect concerns the existing methods and
tools for performing research with spatial data and
their suitability for humanities research. The third
relates to the data that humanists work with. These
two items will be discussed briefly and mainly in the
context of the final aspect which concerns current
research practice and the scholarly institutions
themselves.
4 Existing Methods and Tools
Current GIS methodology is deeply rooted in the
research traditions of the earth scientists who
originally designed GIS software. The research
questions that they sought to answer with their
new methodology concerned physical phenomena
that could be defined in scientific models of physical
behaviour and studied using dense detailed datasets.
These methods have value for some humanities
research, for example in social history studies
of demography, land use or ownership; however,
we also need to consider how to represent the
complexities and subtleties of other aspects of
humanities research in visual form.
A major consideration, and one that is at the core
of many humanities disciplines, is the importance of
time. The need for temporal spatial data handling
has been recognized since the early 1990s (Langren,
1992) but work has been concentrated in only a few
centres and has only recently begun to filter into
mainstream GIS software (very limited handling of
time only being introduced by ESRITMinto its ARC
products in 2003). Current GIS software has very
limited facilities for the handling of time and even
these are based on the scientist’s view of time as
being linear and derived from the phenomenon
under study. Humanists require a view of time that
is determinative and that can work at different rates
and scales moving backwards as well as forwards
on a continuous scale. The work currently being
conducted by historians to place temporal model-
ling in a historical context is likely to produce
methods and tools that are applicable throughout
the humanities. Most of this work has focused on
time alone, for example the development of tools
such as TimeVis (Jensen, 2006) and temporal
modelling work (Drucker and Nowviskie, 2003).
Visualization tools are needed that will produce
interactive maps and timelines as well as allowing
the use of multiple temporal and spatial scales
and linkages between maps, timelines, texts, images,
numeric data, sound and moving images. All this
must be achieved in ways that satisfy scholarly
criteria. Projects such as the Electronic Cultural Atlas
Initiative7 are making considerable progress in these
areas and in coordinating, promoting and building
upon the work of researchers across of the world.
This gives impetus to the development of spatial
and temporal tools such as the temporal GIS
software Timemap.8
Those researchers who opt to use the GIS
software approach to perform research with spatial
data face two very significant obstacles; cost and
M. Jessop
42 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a steep learning curve at the very beginning of their
project. Although the cost of GIS software is still
high it no longer requires a high specification
computer to run; a standard desktop machine is
perfectly adequate. The new knowledge and skills
that are required to make effective use of the tools
and methods are more problematic. However, the
production of maps is not synonymous with the use
of a GIS. It may be that a GIS is unnecessary; maps
can be produced much more easily with many
standard drawing applications. New projects at the
Centre for Computing in the Humanities (CCH) at
King’s College London frequently have a compo-
nent of spatial data as a small part of a much larger
project. The model we have adopted is to have a
spatial data specialist working on a number of
projects simultaneously as part of a collaborative
team. The spatial data tools are built by CCH staff
working in close partnership with scholars to ensure
that the work satisfies the criteria set by each of the
participants. In a department that is as large as
CCH, there is an ‘economy of scale’ that allows us to
dedicate staff to roles that may be uneconomic in
other organizations. This is also the reason why
the development of methodologies, and possible
tools, for use throughout the community is an
important part of our work. The development of
web-based spatial tools appears to offer considerable
potential. At CCH, we are experimenting with the
Google Maps and ESRITM’s freely downloadable
ARCexplorerTM. By building a project around such
technologies a research tool can be developed that
can be made available to a wide community and
which does not require scholars to learn how to
create and manage a GIS; they are left free to pursue
their research interests after acquiring only minimal
new knowledge or skills and without any additional
financial outlay. The close collaboration with
scholars in the fields of study represented in the
work also ensures that a viable scholarly resource or
tool is produced. It can also help reduce problems
with another important set of issues concerning
copyright permissions and intellectual property
rights as each of the collaborating parties feel a
sense of participation and ownership.
The current trend towards establishing national
historical GIS’s (HGIS) such as the Great Britain
Historical GIS and Netherlands Historical GIS pro-
vides many useful case studies that indicate the types
and styles of tools that are desirable. It is interesting
to note how the design philosophies of successive
projects have changed in the light of the experiences
gained from those that have preceded them. It is
significant that the first national historical GIS’s
to be established used a ‘data provider’ model.
In these resources, historical data and map data were
provided in fixed pre-determined ways; users could
not upload their own data or perform their own
analyses on data that was already available there.
Some of the early projects did not produce output
in a form that could be used in publications, thereby
severely limiting their research value. Later projects
overcame these limitations but still placed restric-
tions on the data and maps that could be used and
the analysis that can be performed, their output
essentially being merely for illustration. This has been
likened to allowing scholars only to read a book when
what they want to do is to write one, or to look at
pictures when they really want to make their own.
It is useful to reflect on the design philosophies of one
of the most recent HGIS, the Netherlands HGIS.
Their plan is to provide a tool (web-based GIS
software) together with map boundary data but no
numerical data. The software together with its
documentation and a well-designed interface will
allow users to upload their own data, combine it
with the maps available online, perform their own
analyses and to output them in a variety of formats
that can be downloaded directly into research papers.
This represents the final stage of a transition from the
severely limited functionality of early HGISs to a
valuable open scholarly digital tool. This approach
completely frees scholars from any additional costs
for hardware or software as the tools are available
centrally over the web. It also reduces the problems of
the steep learning curve associated with building
one’s own GIS by concentrating the need for that
expertise in a single national organization.
The greater use of geographical information
could allow us to experience a view of the past that
is highly experiential, providing a fusion of quali-
tative and quantitative information that can be
accessed by both naive and knowledgeable alike.
However, this approach does require careful thought.
Geographical Information in Digital Humanities Scholarship
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 43
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Text is a very effective means of communication
that we are highly adept at using. While it is true
that location can be used in information naviga-
tion and finding aids that are language and culture
independent, it does not mean that we always find
such aids easy to use. The National Library of
Scotland’s usability study of their online presenta-
tion of map material (Fleet, 2006) highlights the
weaknesses of some map-based interfaces. The
library found that even when the content being
searched is itself map material, users find a text-
based search of place names preferable to a
graphical navigation system based on maps. The
study concluded that many people do not ‘think
graphically’; in the case of maps, this is com-
pounded by the fact that it is estimated that within
the UK 60% of people cannot read maps
(Peterson, 2003, p. 306). Digital gazetteers are
one alternative approach but whatever the solu-
tion; the methods, tools, and interfaces that are
developed must be simple, imaginative, intuitive
and encourage exploration of different viewpoints
or agendas in a variety of ways, sometimes being
hybrids of two or more existing approaches.
More generally, and reflecting upon the use of
images in the text dominated arena of humanities
scholarship as a whole, we need to consider what it
means to ‘visualize’ and ‘think visually’. What is it
that we wish to visualize; why are we doing it and
how should it be done? How does what we are doing
differ from the scientific approach and how are
these differences embodied in existing methodolo-
gies and software? Following on from this, we
should ask what it means to ‘think spatially’ and
how we can represent the complex phenomena at
work in the humanities graphically.
The great strength of GIS software to earth
scientists and social scientists (contemporary or
historical) is the analytical techniques that it makes
available. But many of these are irrelevant or cannot
be applied to the sparse fuzzy data typically available
to humanists. We need to decide whether this
matters and what analytical tools are possible, or
indeed actually needed. Digital tools for processing
and manipulating spatial data can be used to
integrate multiple perspectives of the past allowing
them to be visualized at various scales. They can
create dynamic representations of time and place
within culture. Ultimately, the most significant
contribution of GIS to humanities scholarship may
not be as a positivist tool but as a reflexive one.
5 Humanities Data
Factors affecting the nature and collection of data in
the humanities disciplines have considerable bearing
on the development of spatial methods in our
research. The capture of spatial data is a major task
in many projects and thus the scale of effort and
cost of creating digital datasets make some groups
reluctant to share them without charge, this is a
factor that has held back work in this area. There is
also a greater need for multilingual data in the
humanities, but in general, the role of spatial data
in this discussion raises issues that fall into two
categories; those that concern the content and those
that concern resource discovery and management.
The fundamental difference between the scien-
tific methodologies that have shaped the develop-
ment of GIS software and those of the humanist lies
in the nature of the data. The earth scientists who
developed current GIS software had a tradition of
working with high density rich data sources and so
produced software that is ill-equipped to cope with
the sparse and fuzzy data so frequently used by
humanities scholars. The locations found in such
data may be uncertain, that is to say imprecise or
ambiguous, have two or more possible locations, or
be both ambiguous and imprecise at the same time.
However, the high levels of precision that are
desired by a scientist may not be of interest to a
humanist who is seeking more to visualize data
rather than analyse it numerically to high degrees of
precision. However, software will analyse and dis-
play data to high levels of precision even if the data
are known to be imprecise and therefore a means of
depicting uncertainty needs to be developed. There
are ways of compensating for the fuzziness or even
processing it away using geo-statistical techniques
but it is very often the case that it is this ambiguity
and uncertainty that is of interest to the humanities
scholar. It is not a nuisance factor to be eliminated;
it is a valuable aspect of the data and the focus of
much study.
M. Jessop
44 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The same uncertainty and fuzziness that is
characteristic of the location data used in humani-
ties research is also present in our temporal data.
We therefore have the challenge of finding methods
for recording, representing and processing uncer-
tainty in time as well as space.
Despite these problems the number of digital
datasets is growing rapidly and any given dataset
may be of interest to researchers in fields other than
the often highly specialized one for which the data
was originally compiled. How does one define
metadata that will allow researchers in other areas
to find what they need or other data that may also
be of interest? A great deal of work goes into
producing a dataset and they need to be preserved
and disseminated by the national repositories
that are now being established. However, if the
dataset cannot be found by all types of researcher
who may wish to use it may as well not exist. We
need directories of spatial data complete with
metadata that allow effective resource discovery.
To make these directories more effective, we also
need to consider what kinds of contextual and
identification data are needed to make a useful
multi-purpose searchable database for collections.
There is a requirement for more central archives
and a metadata schema that would allow these
resources to be discovered and shared across
archives. The metadata schemas need to be devel-
oped by all interested parties and require collabora-
tion across many disciplines; this is an issue that I
will return to later. Archivists could act as a
community hub for encouraging and implementing
the use of spatial content into their retrieval models
thus providing a further means of linking different
items of evidence in ways that conform to appro-
priate standards. As discussed earlier, the work of
bodies such as the Alexandria Digital Library and
National Council of Archives is pivotal in this
endeavour.
6 Current Research Practice and
the Scholarly Institutions
Ambitious work with spatial data requires a high
level of expertise and usually has a high threshold
of usability. In many cases, the complexity of the
tools that are currently available is a deterring
factor: those scholars that adopt them may find that
the characteristics of the tools and the nature of
the work previously done with them are shaping
their own research agenda. The first question that
researchers need to ask is not ‘How do I use
geographical information in my project?’ but ‘Why
should I use geographical information?’ followed by
‘What type of question can it I ask of it?’ and then
‘What type of questions do I want to ask?’
The most effective way of facilitating this style
of work is through collaboration with researchers
and practitioners with backgrounds in fields such
as geography, history, humanities computing (or
information science and computer science), graphic
design and so on. This marks a move away from
scholars working independently to a model that
necessitates team working, which in turn raises
further problems. The teams required for this style
of collaborative work will be composed of people
with very different backgrounds and credentials.
There is therefore a strong need to transmit research
traditions between disciplines which may have very
different agendas and ways of working. This raises
issues concerning how the contributions of each
member of the team can be acknowledged; for
example, for those whose technical work requires
considerable expert knowledge far beyond ‘technical
support’ but is fundamentally different from the
traditional academic content of the journals and
review boards where the published works will be
assessed in research assessment exercises, such those
in the UK. It also raises the issue of how best to
prepare students for work in an interdisciplinary
team (whether in academia or elsewhere) after
graduation.
Many of the issues outlined earlier require
changes to research practice that can only occur
over a long period. A more pragmatic solution that
could be provided in the short term is a ‘one stop’
source of information to increase awareness of what
can be achieved and to assist researchers in their
formulation of research questions. It would also
provide resources to assist researchers to formulate
research questions, guiding them in their choice
of appropriate methods, and minimizing the steep
Geographical Information in Digital Humanities Scholarship
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 45
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
learning curve at the beginning of a project. It
would need to provide;
 A clear statement of the advantages of GIS and
the study of spatial data expressed in terms of
research outcomes in humanities disciplines.
 A set of exemplars showing existing research
work and discussing how the methodology can
be transmitted between disciplines.
 A set of exemplars of a variety of research tools
explaining different approaches to using geo-
graphical and spatial information in humanities
research.
 The exemplars should be chosen so that they
encourage creative thinking about geographical
and spatial information and how it can
be used, for example, in prosopographies,
historical itineraries, art history, interdisciplinary
teaching, etc.
 Illustrations of how to overcome the expense,
time and steep learning curve involved in
adopting GIS methodology. For example, ‘I need
a map’ does not mean ‘I need to use a GIS’. These
need to be supported by accounts of the
experiences of humanities researchers describing
the choices that they faced and explaining the
basis for their subsequent decisions.
 Links to data sources.
 Links to sources of self study material and
training courses.
 Links to further sources of information and
relevant organizations.
The penultimate item on the list above is a
significant issue. The training required here
reflects the nature of humanities computing in
that it covers a wide range of topics and disciplines.
As a minimum it should include;
 Training programmes and workshops on digiti-
zation, principles of cartography, methodology,
appropriate software and the interpretation of
results in the context of humanities research.
 Training and educational resources for research-
ers who wish to either use digital geographical
and spatial information in their teaching or to
teach spatial visualization methods.
 Training in collaborative/team working. This is
perhaps more of a ‘human resources’ topic but it
is still essential if a research team working in this
area is to be successful.
 Training in visual thinking and the interpretation
of visualizations. This will assist in the inter-
pretation of the results obtained from existing
methods and also encourage thought that could
lead to improved methods.
 Training in Spatial thinking. Thinking about
spatial information is unfamiliar to many; what
sort of relationships are there between objects,
what do they mean? As stated earlier, this would
also involve interpretive skills and creative
thought about developing improved methods.
While the ‘one stop shop’ would be a practical
start to tackling some of the challenges the more
fundamental issues of finding a mechanism for
transmitting research traditions between disciplines
and encouraging cross-discipline alliances to ensure
a common set of standards and tools will require
sustained effort over a prolonged period. Some
organizations are now being established to encour-
age this; for example, the AHRC ICT Methods
Network9 in the UK.
We can learn from those humanists who have
been ‘early adopters’ of methods and tools for
exploring spatial data. Historians have been using
geographical information for some time and the use
of GIS is extremely well represented in conferences
such as those of the Social Science History Association
(SSHA) in the US, but it is notable that this is not so
in the equivalent European organizations. We need
to build upon what has been done by the SSHA and
extend it into humanities disciplines other than
social history at an international level. There is also
a need to move away from the emphasis on GIS;
there are many ways of using spatial data without
recourse to GIS, or even maps.
7 The Scholarly Institutions and
their Perception of Geographical
Information Science and Digital
Visualization
The innovative style of work associated with the use
of spatial data is often seen as ‘dangerous’ and can
M. Jessop
46 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
be viewed as posing a career risk for new academics
who are trying to establish themselves in an
environment where successful research assessment
is critical. There are limited opportunities for
publishing this style of work and as there are
relatively few people with relevant experience at the
top of the profession there can also be problems
with peer review. A mechanism for raising aware-
ness through research results is required. Work
involving spatial data in ‘traditional’ humanities
disciplines also needs to be seen to be obtaining high
research ratings. Allied to this is the fact that as
research assessment frequently involves the assess-
ment of publication records there need to be more
venues for publication. This style of work is new and
is evolving rapidly so a publication mechanism that
is faster than those currently available is required;
the obvious choice is an electronic journal. An
e-journal also has the advantage that the digital
tools used to study spatial data frequently produce
digital output, which is ideally suited to electronic
publication, especially in the case of output such as
animations and dynamic maps. Another significant
advantage of an electronic journal is that it satisfies
a further aim, that of reaching a wider audience and
encouraging greater participation.
Current funding mechanisms could also be an
inhibiting factor because the scale of work that is
being attempted often requires sustained funding
over a number of years and produces digital
resources that will require on-going maintenance
after the completion of the project. These two
funding requirements can pose problems in the
current research and funding environments of the
humanities as models for more sustained funding
are required.
The highly interdisciplinary work associated with
the use of geographical information in humanities
research is typical of the majority of humanities
computing projects and as such highlights many
challenges that are common to work throughout the
digital humanities. Many of these have been
mentioned in the section describing the ‘one stop
shop’. One extension of what has already been said
is the need to recognize each individual’s contribu-
tion to collaborative work. A failure to do so is
perhaps symptomatic of a wider problem of not
fully coming to terms with the nature of inter-
disciplinarity and project partners not under-
standing the differing needs, goals and research
culture of project partners from other disciplines.
This is reflected in research cultures and publi-
cation agendas that are sometimes inhibiting
the acceptance and wider awareness of digital
humanities work.
8 Conclusions
In order to encourage the greater use of geographi-
cal and other spatial information in humanities
research, we need a clear statement of the advan-
tages of GIS and spatial information generally,
expressed in terms of research outcomes. This
should be supported by a set of exemplar projects
and be made available through a ‘one stop’ source of
information. Such a resource could also encourage
creative thinking about geographical and spatial
information and how it can be used in original
ways. The fact that humanists are used to working
primarily with textual sources may be an inhibiting
factor. Many claims are made for the value of GIS as
a visualization tool but it may be that some training
is needed in thinking visually and, importantly, in
the interpretation of the results of visualization.
This raises an important general point that goes
beyond geographic or spatial information but
encompasses many aspects of its use; there are
fundamental issues concerning the status and
function of images in humanities scholarship, this
includes the images produced by digital visualiza-
tion tools. Humanists are used to expressing
themselves, and assessing the work of others,
through the medium of prose. There is a belief
that the visual cannot be as rigorous as the written.
It is seen as, at best, a supplement to the written
word and stands in a subordinate position. There
are historical reasons for this mistrust of visual sense
perception which have their roots in philosophy
and, more practically, in the sheer difficulty until
recently of printing accurately reproducible images.
In many respects, these beliefs are being reinforced
in contemporary publishing and mass media. An
examination of modern educational texts for
schools will reveal that the majority of images are
Geographical Information in Digital Humanities Scholarship
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 47
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
used to aid concentration by breaking up the prose.
They are intended to catch the attention of the
reader who would otherwise be bored by long
sections of text. In Robert Lucky’s words, ‘we have
been well trained on the need for a constant flow
of diversionary pictures’ (Lucky, 1989). Our own
educational experiences, especially those of the ‘next
generation’, include very few instances where the
visual is treated on an equal pedagogical footing with
the written. We have been given little cause to value
images over words and based on the bulk of the
evidence scholars have every reason to treat visuali-
zation as an inferior form of thought and commu-
nication. We need to counter this view with evidence
of the results of genuine scholarly inquiry using not
just geographical information but also digital
visualization as a whole. This is why I believe that
the ‘one stop shop’ described earlier is so important.
There are concerns over the legitimacy of digital
artefacts, whether GIS or other visualizations, as
scholarly publications. Scholars need to decide on
the criteria for assessing the intellectual rigor of such
work. The use of 3D visualization in the research
and communication of cultural heritage is currently
being examined in this context and guidelines
published in The London Charter10 will provide a
valuable framework for the assessment of other
digital objects such as GIS. It is also necessary to
develop evaluative standards for assessing the
credibility, reliability and legitimacy of the publica-
tion venues that display such work. In our own
field, the newly established Digital Humanities
Quarterly11 will prove to be a valuable testing
ground for many of these questions and their
possible solutions.
Within the humanities, historians and archae-
ologists are already taking the established meth-
odologies of Geographic Information Science and
developing a new methodology for the examination
of the human use of space, which is perhaps best
described as Geographical and Social Information
Science (GSIS). This is likely to be adopted and
developed by an increasing number and range of
humanities scholars as awareness of the possibilities
spreads through the community. The study of the
human use of space also finds expression through
the discipline of space syntax,12 which originated in
the fields of architecture and urban design to assess
the social effects of their designs (Hillier and
Hanson, 1986). In recent years, it has been applied
by archaeologists and anthropologists, among
others, and is pertinent to another aspect of the
study of spatial data. These enhanced methodologies
are of great value but they still approach geograph-
ical and spatial information in a fundamentally
scientific way and although we usually think of GIS
as a positivist tool its greatest contribution to the
humanities, as noted earlier, may be not as an
analytical or information presentation tool but as a
reflexive one. Geographical information can be used
to integrate disparate information from multiple
perspectives of the past. Relationships between
people, places and events can be explored and if
necessary visualized at various scales of space and
time via more ‘traditional’ GIS methodology.
Ultimately, the greater, and more imaginative, use
of geographical and spatial information could create
a dynamic representation of time and place within
culture. Future use of geographical information in
humanities scholarship will result in a view of the
past that is highly experiential, providing a fusion of
qualitative and quantitative information that can be
accessed by both naive and knowledgeable alike.
References
Bender, B. (2002). ‘Landscape and Politics’. In
Victor Buchli (ed.), The Material Culture Reader.
Oxford: Berg.
Drucker, J. and Nowviskie, B. (2003) ‘Temporal
Modelling’, ACH/ALLC 2003 Conference. http://
www.english.uga.edu/webx/abstracts/final/abstracts.pdf
pp. 26–28 (accessed January 2007).
Edwin C. Bolles Collection http://nils.lib.tufts.edu/
4000.01/index.html (accessed 30 January 2007).
ESRI ARC Explorer (a free GIS data viewer) http://
www.esri.com/software/arcexplorer (accessed 31
January 2007).
Fleet, C. (2006). ‘Locating trees in the Caledonian forest’:
a critical assessment of methods for presenting series
mapping over the web’. Digital Approaches to
Cartographic Heritage Conference Proceedings. Also in
e-permetron at http://www.e-perimetron.org/Vol_1_2/
Fleet/Fleet.pdf (accessed 30 January 2007).
M. Jessop
48 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Goodchild, M. (2004). ‘The Alexandria Digital Library
Project: Review, Assessment, and Prospects’, D-Lib
Magazine, May 2004, Volume 10, Number 5. http://
www.dlib.org/dlib/may04/goodchild/05goodchild.html
(accessed 30 January 2007).
Great Britain Historical GIS http://www.gbhgis.org/
(accessed 31 January 2007).
Google Maps (a free API) http://www.google.com/apis/
maps/ (accessed 31 January 2007).
Hill, L. L. (2004). Guide to the ADL Gazetteer Content
Standard, version 3.2. Available: http://www.alexandria.
ucsb.edu/gazetteer/ContentStandard/version3.2/
GCS3.2-guide.htm (accessed 30 January 2007).
Hillier, W. and Hanson, J. (1986). The Social Logic of
Space. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jane´e, G. and Hill, L. L. (2003). ADL Gazetteer
Protocol (Version 1.2). Alexandria Digital Library
Project. Available: http://www.alexandria.ucsb.edu/
gazetteer/protocol/specification.html (accessed 30
January 2007).
Jane´e, G., Frew, J., and Hill, L. L. (2004). Issues in
georeferenced digital libraries. D-Lib Magazine, 10 (5).
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/may04/janee/05janee.html
(accessed 30 January 2007).
Jensen, M. (2006). Semantic Timeline Tools for History
and Criticism, Digital Humanities 2006 Conference.
http://www.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/
DHs.pdf, pp. 97–100 (accessed 30 January 2007).
Jessop, M. (2005). ’The application of a geographical
information system to the creation of a cultural
heritage digital resource’. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 20(1): 71–90.
Jessop, M. (2006).’Dynamic maps in humanities comput-
ing’. Human IT 8.3 (2006): 68–82. http://www.hb.se/
bhs/ith/3–8/mj.pdf (accessed 30 January 2007).
Langren, G. (1992). Time in Geographic Information
Systems. London and Washington: Taylor and Francis.
Lucky, R. (1989). Silicon Dreams: Information, Man and
Machine. New York: St Martin’s Press.
Mostern, R. (2006). Digital Gazetteers and Temporal
Directories for Digital Atlases, Digital Humanities 2006
Conference. http://www.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-
sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf, pp. 149–150 (accessed 30
January 2007).
Murariu, E. and Petrescu, F. (1999). Mural Painting
Digital Surveys, CIPA International Symposium 1999.
Available at http://cipa.icomos.org/fileadmin/papers/
olinda/99c209.pdf (accessed 30 January 2007).
National Council on Archives (1997). Rules for the
Construction of Personal, Place and Corporate Names,
at http://www.ncaonline.org.uk/materials/namingrules.
pdf (accessed 31 January 2007).
Novak, J. D. and Canas A. J. (2006). The Theory Underlying
Concept Maps and How to Construct Them. Technical
Report IHMC Cmap tools 2006-01, Florida Institute
for Human and machine Cognition, 2006. http://cmap.
ihmc.us/Publications/ResearchPapers/TheoryUnderlying
ConceptMaps.pdf (accessed 30January 2007).
Perseus Digital Library Project http://www.perseus.tufts.
edu/ (accessed 30 January 2007).
Peterson, M. (2003) (ed.). Maps and the Internet.
Amsterdam, London: International Cartographic
Association.
Schwartz, R. M. (2004). Making the Grade: Railways and
Landscape in Victorian England and Wales. Paper
presented at the European Social Science Historians
Conference 2004, also at http://www.mtholyoke.edu/
courses/rschwart/rail/making_grade.htm (accessed 30
January 2007).
Smith, D. M., Crane, G., and Rydberg-Cox, J. A. (2000).
‘The Perseus project: a digital library for the huma-
nities’. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 15: 15–25.
Southall, H. (2006). Towards a universal gazetteer?
Integrating geographic name lists across disciplines.
Paper presented at the Digital Resources for the
Humanities and Arts conference 2006. Abstract at
http://www.dartington.ac.uk/drha06/papers/abstract.
asp?uid¼81.
Wainer, H. (2005). Graphic Discovery: A Trout in the Milk
and other Visual Adventures. Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press.
Woods, R. and Shelton, N. (1997). An Atlas of Victorian
Mortality. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Notes
1 A palimpsest is a manuscript page that has been written
on, the writing later scraped off, and the writing surface
used again.
2 Valley of the Shadow http://valley.vcdh.virginia.edu/
(accessed 30 January 2007).
3 Salem Witch Trials Documentary Archive http://
etext.virginia.edu/salem/witchcraft/ (accessed 30
January 2007).
4 Alexandria Digital Library http://www.alexandria.ucsb.
edu/(accessed 30 January 2007).
Geographical Information in Digital Humanities Scholarship
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 49
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
5 Pliny website at http://pliny.cch.kcl.ac.uk (accessed 30
August 2007).
6 Pliny website document see http://pliny.cch.kcl.ac.uk/
whatAndWhy.html (accessed 30 August 2007).
7 Electronic Cultural Atlas Initiative http://www.
ecai.org/ (accessed 30 January 2007).
8 Timemap http://www.timemap.net/ (accessed 30
January 2007).
9 AHRC ICT Methods Network http://www.methods
network.ac.uk/ (accessed 30 January 2007).
10 The London Charter web site http://www.london
charter.org/ (accessed 6 February 2007).
11 Humanities Quarterly http://www.digitalhumanities.
org/dhq/ (accessed 06/02/2007).
12 The space syntax laboratory at University College
London describes Space syntax as ‘a set of techni-
ques for the analysis of spatial configurations of all
kinds, especially where spatial configuration seems
to be a significant aspect of human affairs, as it is
in buildings and cities. Originally conceived by
Professor Bill Hillier and his colleagues at The
Bartlett, UCL in the 1980s as a tool to help
architects simulate the likely effects of their designs,
it has since grown to become a tool used around
the world in a variety of research areas and design
applications. It has been extensively applied in
the fields of architecture, urban design, plan-
ning, transportation and interior design. Over the
past decade, space syntax techniques have also been
used for research in fields as diverse as archaeo-
logy, information technology, urban and human
geography, and anthropology’. See http://www.
spacesyntax.org/introduction/index.asp (accessed 30
August 2007).
M. Jessop
50 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
