
But the greatest thing by far is to be a master of
metaphor. It is the one thing that cannot be learnt
from others.
—Aristotle, Poetics 1459a 4–5
1 Introduction
Considering the evolution of digital libraries, Crane
(2006) asks the framing question, ‘What do you do
with a million books?’ One of his conclusions is that
digital libraries allow analysis at different levels
of granularity or scale. And one important level
of granularity is that of the individual figure,
or metaphor. Decomposed into a billion meaningful
components, a million books serve as raw material
for bold new historical explorations of rhetoric, lit-
erature, and thought across genres and between
books. In this article, we examine the consequences
of taking metaphors as our basic units of interpreta-
tion and detail the opportunities presented in so
doing. We consider the tacit assumption, shared by
a variety of scholars, that changing metaphors are
indicative of broader cultural change. Viewing the
history of literature at the semantic level, as a move-
ment of metaphors through discourse, we may per-
ceive long-term regularities in the flux of authors,
texts, and genre. By checking the generalizations of
Correspondence:
Brad Pasanek, UVA English
Department, 219 Bryan Hall,
PO Box 400121,
Charlottesville,
VA 22904-4121, USA.
E-mail:
bmp7e@virginia.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
345
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn010 Advance Access Published on 5 September 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
literary history against collections of electronic texts,
our work with metaphors delivers a host of surpris-
ing observations—both local and general.
In this article, we introduce a database of meta-
phors of mind in eighteenth-century literature. This
initial database is a hand-curated archive of figures
of speech, and its contents were collected by key-
word searching a variety of electronic text collec-
tions. Whereas the contents of the database were
originally enlisted in the writing of a not untradi-
tional project in the field of literary and intellectual
history, it now serves as a small digital library of
metaphors, one which not only enables additional
traditional scholarly research but also a range of
automated analysis techniques from the fields of
machine learning and pattern recognition.
In the remainder of this article, we explore sev-
eral key issues surrounding this collection. We
review the manual construction of this initial collec-
tion in Section 2, and explain why we have chosen
to focus on metaphors of the mind in particular.
Section 3 explores results of machine learning
classification of metaphors, which not only give
promise for automating the expansion of this col-
lection, but also yield new literary-analytical
insights. The utility of working with this collection
is demonstrated in Section 4, which reports a case
study disrupting the intellectual history of the
blank slate, a metaphor associated with John
Locke’s philosophy of mind. Section 5 extends this
work by exploring the use of automated methods of
analysis from machine learning and pattern recog-
nition. The final section concludes with a discussion
centered on plans for future work.
2 A Metaphorical Database
of the Mind
Our initial collection, titled The Mind is a Metaphor,
is currently composed of 8,741 metaphors of mind
that have been harvested principally from collec-
tions of electronic texts (Pasanek, 2006). We treat
the discourse of the British eighteenth century at
large and draw upon philosophy, poetry, novels,
plays, and all manner of prose pieces. We deal in
those images—blank page, dark cave, empire, garden,
mirror, room—that have long-been associated with
the mind and its workings. In doing so, we hope to
limn the structure of mental activity as it is figured
in the literature of the long eighteenth century
(1660–1830). Our approach in constructing this col-
lection is digital, but our efforts remain continuous
with the longer traditions of philology and intellec-
tual history.
2.1 Manually harvesting metaphors
In this section, we review the manual methodology
used to collect the initial set of metaphors. The
Mind is a Metaphor database was first built by key-
word searching the Chadwyck-Healey databases,
Eighteenth Century Collections Online, Early
English Books Online, and other collections of elec-
tronic texts.1 In Chadwyck-Healey alone, evidence
was gathered from 877 books of poetry by 247 dif-
ferent poets, ninety-six long prose narratives, and
628 plays by 137 different playwrights. The process
of harvesting metaphors was labor intensive, requir-
ing years of hand-labeling by a human expert
(Pasanek, 2006). Indeed, the expertise called upon
when dropping down into the middle of a thousand
page expanse of text and deciding in a hermeneutic
instant if a string of words contains a metaphor
involves a traditional kind of training in rhetoric,
literary theory, and intellectual history.
Pasanek (2006) worked through various itera-
tions of a manual search protocol for harvesting
metaphors. The first protocol searched for occur-
rences of the terms ‘mind’, ‘heart’, ‘soul’, and a
related set of words in a set of canonical and non-
canonical texts, which revealed the full diversity of
eighteenth-century metaphors of mind in antholo-
gies of poetry, works of philosophy, obscure novels,
journalism, and drama. The second iteration of the
protocol included more refined searches for specific
terms and phrases that signal the appearance of
metaphors in a text. The third protocol added the
refinement of proximity searches, which allowed
collection of material in a more focused, efficient
manner. In most cases, the keyword search was
exhaustive within the given literature database, find-
ing all occurrences of a word or words (for example,
‘mind’ and ‘eye’ within a span of one hundred char-
acters) were consulted before final decisions were
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
346 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
made about the metaphoricity of any one sentence
in which the terms in question appeared.
Furthermore, the search often revealed additional
metaphors and keywords in neighboring sentences,
which were then added to the protocols, ultimately
producing a mapped network of related metaphors.
This effort has produced a curated data set of high
quality, which can enable machine learning methods
to automate both the expansion of this collection
and the analysis of its contents.
2.2 The current collection
In October 2005, the database that houses the col-
lection of metaphors was published online at http://
metaphorized.net. It is our hope that scholars from
a wide range of disciplines—including cognitive lin-
guists, intellectual historians, and philosophers—
will find the massive library of metaphors both pro-
vocative and useful as a work of reference. As of
today, the database contains over 8,600 records;
each record or entry identifies and categorizes a
single metaphor. Each of these metaphors is dis-
played in the context of the work in which it
appears; it is taxonomized, identified by author,
by date of publication, genre, rhetorical figure
type, metaphor category, and so forth.
We know of three other open and online data-
bases of metaphor of interest: John Barnden’s data-
bank,2 the Hamburg Metaphor Database,3 and The
Conceptual Metaphor server.4 Barnden’s databank
is closest to our own collection of metaphors as it
exclusively contains examples of figurative des-
criptions of mental states and processes.5 Both
Barnden’s databank and the Hamburg Metaphor
Database project acknowledge Lakoff’s and
Johnson’s theory of conceptual metaphor as the
paradigm that informs their collection and storage
of metaphors (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980), and it is
Lakoff’s Conceptual Metaphor Home Page that pro-
vides the fastest introduction to the system of cate-
gorization employed by these cognitive linguists.
Our collection differs from these other collections
both in scale, being nearly an order of magnitude
larger, and in scope. Our work is geared towards the
history of metaphor and thought.
In writing the history of metaphor, the historian
must pay particular attention to how key terms are
used, how conceptual pictures are invoked, how the
metaphors are employed, and by whom. The philo-
sopher J. L. Austin (1961) has called this kind of
effort (although only half-seriously) ‘linguistic phe-
nomenology’. One might compare a similar pro-
nouncement of philologist E. R. Curtius (1990),
who in all seriousness frames his own research ques-
tions in European Literature and Latin Middle Ages
as a ‘prolegomena to what I should like to call a
phenomenology of literature’ (ix). Attending to the
metaphor of mind first, detailing its use and applica-
tion in the context, we gain deeper insight into the
function of metaphor at large. But by searching elec-
tronic texts, collecting metaphors in a database, and
using techniques from computational linguistics to
analyze the assembled material, the linguistic pheno-
menologist can multiply examples well beyond what
Austin or Curtius would have believed possible.
2.3 The virtues of drudgery
In his 1755 Dictionary of the English Language,
Samuel Johnson is careful to define ‘lexicographer’
as ‘writer of dictionaries; a harmless drudge’. That
adjective ‘harmless’ is tongue in cheek—or some-
thing more. Drudgery is wearisome, yes, but also
transformative, intoxicating, and empowering.
Drudgery is at the heart of the interdisciplinary con-
versation in which literary historians and computer
scientists participate, because the computer is the
most thorough of drudges. The literary historian
and the computer scientist come together to develop
methods for automating the very drudgery that
characterizes lexicography itself. The humanist
must put aside his fears of machines run amok,
even as he remembers that Victor Frankenstein’s
creature was also weaned on Milton.
3 Learning to Recognize
Metaphors
The process of manually searching for and tagging
metaphors is painstaking, costly work, but the
efforts of the literary critic have produced a high
quality database. From a literary point of view,
this database is a library of metaphors, but from a
machine learning perspective, this database is a rich
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 347
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
set of training data for creating automatic classifiers
that can automatically tag metaphors and nonme-
taphors. This is the classic machine learning frame-
work. A classifier is first trained on a set of known,
labeled data, and is then asked to classify a large set
of new data for which the true labels are not yet
known (Mitchell, 1997).
In this section, we demonstrate the feasibility of
a machine learning approach to metaphor
recognition by training a classifier to distinguish
metaphors from nonmetaphors in the works of
several eighteenth-century authors. We find not
only that our classifiers are able to distinguish meta-
phorical usage within a single author’s work, but
also that a model learned on one author often trans-
fers to other authors. For example, Shakespeare’s
Renaissance metaphors inform the discovery of
the Augustan metaphors in Pope’s poetry, and
vice versa. This finding has practical value as a
method of bootstrapping the manual effort of
labeling metaphors. We might add, these findings
trouble a traditional belief, first articulated in
Aristotle’s Poetics, that the use and recognition of
metaphors cannot be learned.
In the remainder of this section, we describe our
methodology. We review the standard practice in
text classification and show how we represent each
of our metaphors with a bag of words vector. This
vector data is used to train a classifier called a sup-
port vector machine (SVM), which is known to give
state of the art performance on the related task of
text classification (Joachims, 1998). We then detail
our experimental methodology, and report results
showing classification accuracy, learning rates, and
transfer.
3.1 Mapping metaphors to vectors
In machine learning, as in classical information
retrieval, it is standard practice to represent text
documents as vectors (Salton and Buckley, 1988;
Mitchell, 1997). This enables the use of a variety
of machine learning methods originally designed
for vector-based data, including SVM classifiers
described below. The vector representation most
commonly used is the bag of words vector. A bag
of words vector ~x exists in a vector space Rm. This is
a space of very high dimensionality, in which m
represents the total number of unique words in
the vocabulary, and each word i is represented by
a unique coordinate ~xi .
We can map a text t to a vector ~x in the space Rm
by letting ~xi ¼ ciðtÞ, where ci(t) shows the number
of occurrences of word i in the text t. This simple
count based scheme for scoring words is the one
that we employ; other scoring schemes include
binary scoring and the TF-IDF scoring method
(Salton and Buckley, 1988). The mapping may be
accomplished with low computation and memory
cost by exploiting sparsity of the data: only a small
fraction of all possible vocabulary words are present
in most texts. Sparse data structures exist which do
not require any ~xi ¼ 0 to be represented. In general,
we assume that all punctuation has been removed,
and all letters converted to lower case. However, we
do not perform word stemming, owing to irregula-
rities in eighteenth-century spelling.6
In our domain of metaphors of the mind, body,
heart, and soul, we start with a database of text
excerpts. Each excerpt consists of a small number
words—usually no more than a sentence—contain-
ing a keyword (such as ‘mind’) and its context. Each
excerpt has been labeled as being a metaphor, or a
nonmetaphor (Fig. 1). We create our data set treat-
ing each excerpt as a unique text t which is mapped
to a bag of words vector ~x, and is given label y.
In this domain, positive examples of metaphors
are given label y ¼ ðþ1Þ and negative examples
(i.e. nonmetaphors) are given label y ¼ ð1Þ.
Thus, the database of metaphors is mapped to a
set of labeled vectors, with which we can train and
test our classifiers.
3.2 Classification with SVMs
In this set of experiments, we work with linear SVM
classifiers. SVMs are one form of linear classifier,
and give state of the art performance on text classi-
fication (Joachims, 1998). They are particularly well
suited to the task of learning high dimensional data,
such as our data set of sparse, high dimensional bag
of words vectors.
Recall that our data of metaphors and nonmeta-
phors are represented as vectors, which can be
thought of as points in a space. A linear SVM
finds a hypothesis vector ~w and bias term b, which
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
348 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
define a hyperplane separating two classes of data—
in our case, separating metaphors from nonmeta-
phors (Fig. 1). While there are many machine learn-
ing methods that create a separating hyperplane
(Mitchell, 1997), SVM are statistically robust
because they find a hyperplane that maximizes the
margin between the two classes of data. This is for-
malized by finding a hypothesis vector ~w which
minimizes the following objective function:
ð ~w, Þ ¼ 1
2
jj ~wjj2 þ C
Xm
i¼1
i:
Minimizing the above function has two goals.
Minimizing the right hand term corresponds to
minimizing training error. Each value i shows the
amount of error the current hypothesis gives on the
corresponding example in the training data xi , andPm
i¼1 i is a summation of all the training errors.
Clearly, effective training should minimize error
on the training data. Minimizing the left hand
term, 12 jj ~wjj
2, corresponds to minimizing the com-
plexity of the model. That is, SVMs prefer a simple
hypothesis to a complex hypothesis. Intuitively, a
simple hypothesis is one with a large margin
around the hypothesis separating the two classes
(Fig. 1). The goals of minimizing training error
and minimizing model complexity are often in ten-
sion; the parameter C is set by the user to tell the
algorithm how much weight to give to each of these
goals in training (Scholkopf and Smola, 2002).
This idea of minimizing training error while
keeping the model as simple as possible puts a
guarantee on the ability of the classifier to generalize
its findings and classify new (previously unseen)
examples well. For a complete overview of SVMs,
see the introductory tutorial by Burges (1998), or
texts by Cristianini and Shawe-Taylor (2002),
and Scholkopf and Smola (2002). In all of our clas-
sification experiments, we used the LIBSVM imple-
mentation (Chang and Lin, 2001)with linear kernel,
at default settings.
3.3 Testing recognition of metaphorical
usage
We first tested whether metaphors and nonmeta-
phors are distinguishable within a single author’s
work. For these experiments, we used SVM classifi-
cation, and used 100-fold cross validation to secure
results. [n-Fold cross validation is a commonly used
method of establishing test error rates, in which the
data set is randomly divided into n distinct subsets.
A total of n tests are then run; for each test n 1 sets
are used for training, and the remaining set is used
for testing (Witten and Frank, 2005).] We ran
experiments on seven authors: William Cowper,
Henry Fielding, John Keats, John Milton,
Alexander Pope, Samuel Richardson, and William
Shakespeare. Additionally, we ran experiments on
the ‘Lonsdale’ data set, which contains metaphors
collected from an important anthology of eigh-
teenth-century women poets edited by Roger
Lonsdale (1989). The data sets were of differing
size and class distribution, as detailed in Table 1.
Our results on these experiments, reported in
Table 1, were encouraging. We achieved high
levels of accuracy on all data sets, even those of
relatively small size.
Learning curves. These tests give us confidence that
SVM classification may indeed be a plausible
method for automatically harvesting more meta-
phors for ‘The Mind is a Metaphor’ database from
the eighteenth century as well as from neighboring
historical periods. But how much more manual
labor must be conducted, especially in unexplored
periods, before the application of machine learning
Margin
Separating
Hyperplane 
Negative
Examples 
Positive
Examples
Fig. 1 Visualizing SVM classification. An SVM learns a
hyperplane that separates the positive and negative data
examples with the maximum possible margin. In our case,
positive examples are metaphors, and negative examples
are nonmetaphors
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 349
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
methods can be effective? To answer this question,
we plotted a set of learning curves for each data set,
which appears in Fig. 2. The learning curve plots
training set size versus test accuracy. We con-
structed this plot averaging over twenty indepen-
dent trials. The curve shows that, in general, high
levels of accuracy may be obtained with relatively
few total training examples. Most of the curves have
hit their maximum performance with between 100
and 200 training examples. Thus, to expand our
inquiry into the metaphorics of new periods,
moving outward from the core eighteenth-century
examples by pushing forward into the future and
reaching backward into the past—into the
Renaissance and Victorian periods, respectively—
may not necessitate any more than a small seed
set of examples. In less than a week’s time, an inti-
mate cohort of period specialists could produce sev-
eral such training sets for the long dure´e of mental
metaphorics that stretches from medieval literature
to present-day postmodern publications, which
means we may well come to include new authors
or genres and periods, without having to label many
thousands of metaphors by hand.
3.4 Testing transfer
Is it necessary to train a unique model for each
individual author? We would hope that our
models of metaphors and nonmetaphors can gener-
alize beyond a specific author. As a first test of
this idea, we combined all eight data sets into
one aggregate data set, and performed 100-fold
cross validation on it. If the use of metaphors and
non-metaphors does not generalize from author to
author, we would expect that this aggregation would
cause a significant decrease in classification accu-
racy. However, as the ‘All’ column in Table 1
shows, SVM classification still achieved high levels
of accuracy on this test.
We then explicitly tested the ability of models
trained on one author to classify metaphors and
nonmetaphors from different authors. We did this
by training a unique SVM classifier for each of the
eight authors, and then testing that classifier on each
of the remaining seven authors. Results of this
experiment are given in Table 2, and are generally
positive—models trained on many of the authors do
indeed transfer to other authors. Notable exceptions
include poor performance transferring between the
novelists and poets and between certain poets and
Shakespeare.
The results are surprisingly strong and enable an
original path of analysis between authors. But how is
it possible that a machine can use metaphors from
Table 1 Results on recognition of metaphorical usage
Cowper Fieldg. Keats Lonsd. Milton Pope Rchdsn. Skspr. All
Mphrs. 130 133 75 168 34 190 159 226 1115
NonMphrs. 219 63 100 222 125 81 98 724 1632
Accuracy 0.885 0.878 0.869 0.936 0.862 0.919 0.848 0.944 0.867
Results are given for each of the six author data sets, evaluated using 100-fold cross validation, and also for a data set of all authors
tested together, also evaluated using 100-fold cross validation. The number of metaphors and nonmetaphors in each data set are also
given.
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Ac
cu
ra
cy
Num. Training Examples
Learning Curves
Cowper
Fielding
Keats
Lonsdale
Milton
Pope
Richardson
Shakespeare
Fig. 2 Learning curves for recognition of metaphorical
usage. This graph shows how the accuracy of the classifier
improves with the number of training examples, for each
of the eight data sets. Note that a relatively small number
of training examples is sufficient to achieve near-asymp-
totic accuracy
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
350 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Pope’s neoclassical poetry to find metaphors in
Shakespeare’s playful, punning comedies? Pope and
Shakespeare occupy two distinct, clearly distin-
guished periods in the history of literature; their
writing is separated by a full century of turmoil
and innovation. In survey courses undergraduate
English students learn that Shakespeare is followed
by a host of ‘Metaphysical’ poets. The Augustan
period in which Pope is situated is characterized by
a concern with literary propriety: figures of speech
must be used sparingly. Elegant and simple compar-
isons are favored. However, because the long poetic
tradition is one of continuous reference and allusion,
these findings are not, perhaps, so surprising. It is in
the eighteenth century that Shakespeare is installed
as England’s national genius, after all. And in 1725,
Pope published an edition of Shakespeare’s works.7
Pope’s annotators discover echoes of Shakespeare in
almost all of his poems.
Likewise, scholarship on John Keats often draws
connections between the Romantic poet’s use of
language and the poetry of Milton and Shake-
speare. Many of these critical comparisons are moti-
vated by formal investigations of Keats’ poetry:
Keats adapts early modern sonnet structures to
write his own famous sequence of odes and borrows
from Milton in his fragmentary attempts to write a
modern epic. But our results demonstrate that
Keats’ figuration of mental substance and activity
would also seem to exhibit continuity with those
metaphors of mind used by Milton and Shake-
speare. As in the case of Shakespeare’s and Pope’s
use of metaphors, the classifier trained on Keats
does well when predicting metaphors in Milton
and Shakespeare. The critic interested in construct-
ing genealogies and who happily explores influence
or traces continuities in poetic diction will be amply
rewarded by the results presented in Table 2.
If a machine learns from one poet to find metaphors
in another, we are encouraged to reopen discussions
of what that latter poet may have learned from the
former.
The discovery that a model transfers from one
author to another is significant. The history of
metaphors for the mind may include a long tradi-
tion of figures that are lightly altered to fit new
contexts. Figurative resources employed in picturing
the mind change slowly. Allusions add depth and
the texture to a poem, and new poets quote older
poets in order to insert themselves in the very tradi-
tion from which they draw their citations. A more
cynical interpretation of these results, points out the
underlying politics of canon formation: the trans-
ference between Pope and Shakespeare displays little
more than the unified taste of those critics who
determine just which (English, white, male, bour-
geois) authors are to be installed in the pantheon of
western literature. The foregoing are commonplaces
of literary history, but they bear repeating in the
current critical climate in which explorations of
rupture are valued over descriptions of accretion
and continuity.
3.5 Testing inter-author ambiguity
While the preponderance of our examples are drawn
from poetry, we also studied the metaphorics of two
Table 2 Results on transfer of metaphorical recognition
Trained On Cowper Fieldg. Keats Tested on
Lonsd.
Milton Pope Rchdsn. Skspr.
Cowper X 0.648 0.794 0.592 0.736 0.708 0.525 0.623
Fielding 0.590 X 0.651 0.892 0.836 0.705 0.728 0.768
Keats 0.871 0.694 X 0.915 0.906 0.897 0.494 0.931
Lonsdale 0.734 0.837 0.606 X 0.849 0.771 0.724 0.846
Milton 0.799 0.714 0.646 0.869 X 0.642 0.693 0.826
Pope 0.756 0.653 0.789 0.772 0.862 X 0.578 0.941
Richardson 0.728 0.806 0.457 0.856 0.811 0.546 X 0.711
Shakespeare 0.705 0.633 0.726 0.692 0.862 0.838 0.494 X
Results are given for transfer of recognition accuracy. Model was trained on data set from one author; this model was tested on data set
from other authors. Reported score reflects accuracy on test of distinguishing metaphors from nonmetaphors.
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 351
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
important eighteenth-century novelists, Henry
Fielding and Samuel Richardson. It is well known
that Fielding’s and Richardson’s relationship was
not a friendly one: Fielding’s career as a writer of
prose fiction began when he satirized Richardson’s
first novel. Richardson never forgave Fielding, even
after Fielding complimented Richardson’s Clarissa
and composed his own Amelia in the serious, didac-
tic style of Richardson. Fielding’s novels are largely
energetic, humorous, even sexy; Richardson’s brim
with sentiment and sentiments, and showcase night-
marish, claustrophobic interactions. And yet, the
amount of transfer between models trained on
these two authors shows that Fielding and
Richardson do share metaphors of mind.
We take this analysis one step further, and
produce a confusion matrix by grouping the data
sets from the two authors and assigning four
class labels to the metaphors: Fielding Metaphors,
Fielding Non-Metaphors, Richardson Metaphors,
and Richardson Non-Metaphors. This data set was
split into training and test sets with cross validation,
and the results of multi-class SVM classification are
shown in the resulting confusion matrix in Table 3.
The results along the diagonal show the number of
correctly classified metaphors. Of particular interest,
however, are the relatively high number of times
that an actual Fielding Metaphor was classified
as a Richardson Metaphor and that an actual
Richardson Metaphor was classified as a Fielding
Metaphor. These results show that, whatever else
separates them, the metaphorical vocabularies of
these two authors do, indeed, overlap enough that
they are difficult to distinguish one from the other.
Overall, the results from SVM classification show
that automated expansion of the database is a
practical alternative to pure manual effort.
Although these methods produce high levels of
accuracy, they are not free from error. One use of
these methods is to employ them as an initial filter,
to speed manual labeling efforts. But we must also
consider the question of what level of noise (if any)
is acceptable in such a collection. The literary his-
torian is not pleased to find errors inserted into his
database, but may well learn that noise and error are
of interest in themselves. When a machine mistakes
a metaphor, the example asks to be attended to
more closely.8
4 Blank Slates: A Case Study
We hope to illustrate the practical utility of this
project by pulling out a specific constellation of
metaphors from the Mind is a Metaphor collection
and discussing it in the context of literary history.
Ours is a metaphor’s- or meme’s-eye view of dis-
course, and we take as an example, the best-known
metaphor from British empiricism, an emblem
of empiricism itself. In this section, we present a
case study of Locke’s ‘white Paper, void of
all Characters.’
4.1 Overturning misconceptions
The most magisterial critic of eighteenth-century
metaphors of mind, M. H. Abrams, claims in his
classic study The Mirror and the Lamp, that it was
John Locke, ‘who more than any philosopher estab-
lished the stereotype for the popular view of the
mind in the eighteenth century’ (Abrams, 1953)
Abram’s assignment of Locke’s place in intellectual
history is taken for granted by most every practicing
critic of eighteenth-century literature. But as will be
demonstrated, the true history of Locke’s metaphor
is both more complicated and more compelling. By
navigating electronic texts we put in question those
commonplace from the history of ideas that have
exaggerated Locke’s place in the history of the eigh-
teenth century.
The first thing revealed by harvesting and
evaluating metaphors is that the metaphor both
predates Locke’s Essay Concerning Human
Understanding (Locke, 1975) and outruns Locke’s
Table 3 Confusion matrix for Fielding versus Richardson
Actual Predicted
Fieldg.
Non-Meta.
Richdsn.
Non-Meta.
Fieldg.
Meta.
Richdsn.
Meta.
Fieldg. Non-Meta. 34 14 14 1
Richdsn. Non-Meta. 9 71 6 12
Fieldg. Meta. 5 13 79 36
Richdsn. Meta. 7 24 38 90
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
352 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
application of it. The tabula rasa of Aristotle,
Proclus, and Aquinas survives the print revolution,
and scraped wax tablets are updated, mutatis
mutandis, as blank sheets of paper. The metaphor
appears in several Renaissance courtesy manuals. In
seventeenth-century England two poets and play-
wright anticipate Locke’s metaphor. Thomas
Hobbes too describes ‘common people’s minds’ as
‘clean paper’, which is ‘fit to receive whatsoever by
public authority shall be imprinted in them.’
Locke’s metaphor obscures these earlier uses
and others that follow. So Joseph Addison writes
for a ‘Set of Men’ called the ‘Blanks of Society’,
Thomas Jefferson deploys the metaphor to charac-
terize the continual revolution in American
architecture, and in a Jacobin novel by Mary Hays,
a misogynistic character asserts, ‘The mind of a
young lady should be clear and unsullied, like
a sheet of white paper.’
More than a tabulation of uses, an aggregation of
metaphors points up issues in semantics and the
‘epidemiology’ or ‘phenomenology’ of metaphor.
We have found that Locke’s refinement of the
blank slate metaphor does not displace innatist fig-
ures of speech, as is commonly argued by historians
of philosophy.9 In fact, innate stamps and marks in
the mind persist in eighteenth-century discourse in
spite of Lockean metaphorics. It becomes clear, as
we collect examples from electronic text collections,
that Locke’s deployment of the metaphor is only
one of several competing uses of the metaphor.
The use of the metaphor by Locke and other
empiricist philosophers to make a case against
the existence of innate characters or principles
written in the soul is only one of many available
uses of the metaphor. In the literature published
in the period that follows the appearance of
Locke’s Essay in 1690, authors put the blank slate
metaphor to several different, often contradictory
uses. The metaphor is not univocal; it is ambiguous,
polysemous. To treat the mind as a blank slate,
without specifying a rhetorical context, is to invite
any number of competing paraphrases of the meta-
phor, a great number of which have little or
nothing to do with the existence of innate marks
or characters written, ‘by the finger of God’, in the
infant mind or soul.10
4.2 Context and metaphor
Because the history of ideas and computer-aided
analysis of literature should never be pursued to
the exclusion of social and cultural historical evi-
dence, we look to the material culture and contem-
porary print technology for further clarification.
The Stamp Acts passed by Parliament supply con-
tent to the metaphors. The eponymous stamp, a red
mark placed on a sheet of paper, indicated that the
tax had been paid (Fig. 3). Because much paper was
stamped before it was put through a printing press,
Locke’s ‘white Paper’ may be pictured as already
marked with a red stamp.
Locke’s use of the metaphor is thus vitiated by its
own print culture context and proves reversible, and
Locke’s antagonists are quick to reappropriate it,
putting it to a use antithetical to Locke’s. The
stamps incorporate an image of the monarch’s
crown, and the design of these stamps often includes
the word ‘DUTY’ (as in a ‘tax’), which suits them
ideally to the ethical and theological projects of
those philosophers and theologians who recruit
metaphors of divine stamping in their revisions of
Fig. 3 A tax on the blank page
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 353
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Locke’s ‘white paper’ metaphor and who theorize an
innatist ethics of moral obligation or imagine an
inborn faculty of moral sense.
While some twenty explicitly Lockean citations
appear in the electronic text collections searched
by keyword, more than half of these citations are
negations, denials, or qualifications of the blank
slate metaphor. The great majority of the almost
two hundred instances of ‘white paper’ or ‘tabula
rasa’ do not reference Locke’s use of the metaphor
at all. Often attribution is oblique: the mind has
been compared to a tabula rasa by ‘some’, ‘some
authors’, or ‘some philosophers’. Epicurus is cred-
ited in many cases, Aristotle in many more. By
mining the ‘million book’ library and harvesting
metaphors from hundreds of books, we produce a
more accurate and more nuanced picture of a meta-
phor’s place in the history of philosophy. We dis-
cover that the blank slate is not Locke’s metaphor; it
only came to be associated with his philosophy so
exclusively in later centuries.
Throughout the eighteenth century, the meta-
phor of the blank slate may be readily associated
with Epicureans, Socinians, materialists, atheists,
Free-Thinkers, and Hobbists, but the metaphor
also continues to function in antagonistic devo-
tional contexts where the sinner must prepare him
or herself to receive the stamp or impress of divine
truth by erasing, blotting, or removing all the false
and world opinions that have been scribbled in his
or her soul. In a number of sermons the sinner is
exhorted to address himself to God with entire res-
ignation: ‘The Heart must be Tabula Rasa, white
Paper to his Pen . . . Let [God] write upon me what
he pleaseth, and make what Impressions he pleaseth
upon me’ (Henry, 1713, p. 20). Skeptics too use the
metaphor in much the same way: the doubter’s mind
is a blank slate, without bias, expunged of opinion. In
two particular cases, the metaphor is even associated
with Descartes’ philosophical project of hyperbolical
doubt11—the very philosophical project that many
historians of philosophy credit Locke’s argument
against innate ideas with displacing.
And while Locke is often located in a tradition of
radical Whig politics, the blank slate is not always an
emblem of equality at birth and a call to reform and
revolution. The metaphor is more ambivalent, if not
fully ambiguous, and proves a ready-made emblem
of oppression. Hobbes’s common people’s minds
are available to be scribbled over with ideology,
and male hegemony would preserve the fair, blank
sex still clean and spotless until the blank young lady
is ready for marriage. The blank slate metaphor is
involved in pedagogical contexts but is also used to
picture those geriatric minds in which all ideas have
come to be erased. The metaphor is denied by some
theologians but employed by others, it is found
alternately in Pyrrhonist, neo-Aristotelian, and
moral sense philosophy. Pedagogues of all stripes
use the metaphor to forward specific, incompatible
educational agendas. In short, the meaning of a
metaphor is given by the context in which it
appears. Traditional metaphors endure and prove
reversible, antagonists put the same metaphor to
antithetical purposes. The blank slate is, as it were,
a blank slate.
5 Automating Metaphorical
Analysis
The preceding case study highlights the utility of
creating a digital library of curated metaphors—it
enables the literary historian to practice his or her
craft with greater sophistication. However, manually
mining this data still introduces potential for what
the computer scientist recognizes as human biases
into the analysis. In this section, we examine two
automated methods of analyzing metaphors. The
first ranks keywords by importance, using the
Kullback–Liebler distance from information theory
(Duda et al., 2000), which reveals underlying pat-
terns of word usage, semantics, and style. The
second method creates a hierarchical clustering
of the metaphors, grouping similar metaphors
together as branches of a tree, and makes pattern
discovery possible at higher more abstract levels
of interpretation.
5.1 Kullback–Liebler distance
One question to ask is, what words are most
strongly associated with metaphors of the mind?
We conduct analysis to answer this question, using
the Kullback–Liebler distance (DKL), which is a
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
354 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(nonmetric) measure of distance between two prob-
ability distributions (Duda et al., 2000). Similar to
the concept of mutual information, DKL is based off
the notion of cross entropy between two distribu-
tions. The formula for DKL is:
DKLðP, QÞ ¼
X
i
PðiÞ log PðiÞ
QðiÞ :
In our context, for each word i in the lexicon of a
given author, this measure compares the probability
P(i) of this word occurring in metaphorical usage by
that author to the probability Q(i) of that word
occurring in general usage as measured across the
full corpus of that author’s text. Thus, words are
weighted by how important they are to that author’s
metaphorical style.
We have measured the DKL for words appearing in
Shakespeare’s and Pope’s metaphors of heart, mind,
body, and soul. The fifteen most important words on
this measure are reported in Tables 4 and 5 (stop
words omitted). We found the encounter with a
string of words ranked by Kullback–Liebler distance
to be an alienating one for the literary historian, but
quickly realized that just this sort of defamilarization
is a good thing. At first, a literary critic will fixate on
those terms that he or can connect to a line in the
poem from which it originates, but the critic even-
tually begins to learn to read these columns of words
and numbers in lieu of the texts from which they
were derived. The table then becomes a new text
and presents itself for interpretation. Obviously,
this is no ordinary form of literary interpretation,
but the insights won from the tables and charts
here displayed bear upon the more traditional eval-
uations and appraisals of a writer’s use of language.
The critic returns to the printed page with a new
appreciation for the complex patterns operating
almost invisibly in literary language. Specifically,
the critic returns and pays closer attention to pas-
sages with the Kullback–Liebler words in them.
In the Kullback–Liebler tables historical and the-
matic differences between Pope and Shakespeare
become visible again. While ‘steel’ ranks high in
relation to ‘heart’ in both Shakespeare’s and
Pope’s analyses, the Shakespearean heart includes
‘flint’ and consequent terms redolent of fire
(‘quench’, ‘kindling’, ‘furnace’). Shakespeare would
here seem to be in the thrall of both Galenic con-
ceptions of the heart as the source of vital heat and
traditional figures that picture love as a flame.
Pope’s terms are more motley: feathers, nosegays,
and quivers appear. Shakespeare’s heart is marked
with the first person possessive; Pope’s with the
third person—not ‘my’ heart but ‘hers’.
Shakespeare’s mind is opprest, stiff, and stoops;
Pope’s dances and glimmers but is prone to anarchy
and vomition.
Pope would also seem to display advances in
eighteenth-century brain science. Under the heading
Table 4 Kullback–Liebler analysis for Shakespeare
metaphors
Rank Heart Mind Body Soul
1. Heart Mind My Soul
2. My Formd Quench My
3. Steel Haue Unload Black
4. Tearts Weake Kindling Don’t
5. Thy Opprest Body Grossly
6. Breast Kindes Moisture Thoughts
7. Quench Impression Furnace Lim
8. Stubborn Marble Coals Struggling
9. Flint Stiff Flames O
10. Tongue Griped Selfsame Trunks
11. Kindling Dross Fires Wing
12. Unload Fraud Burns Infuse
13. His Stoops Serves Animals
14. Strings Waxen Burden Vesture
15. Furnace Eye Scarce His
Table 5 Kullback–Liebler analysis for Pope metaphors
Rank Heart Mind Body Soul
1. Heart Mind Body Soul
2. Steel Rul Soul Body
3. Brain Soul Cave Mind
4. Her Body Conformations Operations
5. Feathers Passion Refin Steeld
6. Caelest Find Arteries Self
7. Tun Propositions Nerves Cave
8. Bodied Anarchy Mind Pineal
9. Nosegay Faintly Receptacle Gland
10. My Dancing Roul Investigate
11. Windowd Glimmring Operations Arteries
12. Ideas Confind Pind Fermentation
13. Quivers Jigs Sepulchre Fever
14. Soul Refin Supposd Restless
15. Knots Vomition Savry Quivers
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 355
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
‘Body’, ‘nerves’ and ‘arteries’ rank high, under
‘Soul’, ‘pineal’, ‘fever’, and ‘gland’. Shakespeare’s
body is, like his heart, on fire: we picture kindling,
coals, flames, fires, and burning. Pope, crippled by
tuberculosis of the bone, lived as a ‘hunchback’ in a
period that had no sympathy for any kind of phys-
ical deformity. The terms that rank high under
‘Body’ include ‘Sepulchre’. Strong dualism is here
apparent in Pope: the body is also a cave or a recep-
tacle. At the head of the columns, ‘mind’, ‘body’,
and ‘soul’ jostle for position.
5.2 Hierarchical clustering
Examining word importance with the DKL score
yields useful insights, but may not be enough to
tell the whole story. For example, the top DKL
words for the blank slate metaphors of the mind
are ‘tabula’, ‘rasa’, ‘blank’, and ‘paper’. Clearly, all
these words carry importance, but from a list alone
it is unclear how they interacted in eighteenth-
century blank slate metaphors of the mind. A
deeper level of automated analysis is required, and
for this we turn to clustering methods.
There are a wide variety of clustering techniques;
these belong to the family of unsupervised machine
learning methods. In general, clustering seeks to
automatically group similar examples, where simi-
larity is defined by some distance measure. [See the
text by Duda et al. (2000) for a complete discussion
of clustering methods.] In this analysis, we apply a
hierarchical clustering method to all of the collected
blank slate metaphors, which allows clear visualiza-
tion of the patterns of usage.
The particular clustering method we applied cre-
ates a hierarchical tree of examples by iteratively
joining the two most similar examples in the data
set (Stolcke, 1996). [This is referred to as the
‘unweighted pair group’ method by Sneath and
Sokal (1973).] Distance between metaphors was
computed by mapping each metaphor to a bag of
words vector, in which the score for each feature was
assigned by xi ¼ bðiÞDKLðmðiÞ, nðiÞÞ, where b(i) is the
binary f0, 1g score indicating presence of word i in
the given metaphor, m(i) is the probability of that
word occuring in metaphorical usage, and n(i) is the
probability of the word occuring in the author’s gen-
eral usage. We use DKL term weighting rather than
other scoring schemes, such as binary weighting or
TF-IDF scoring, as we this method computes simi-
larity between metaphors based on the strength of
the metaphorical keywords in the examples.
The results of hierarchical clustering on blank
slate metaphors are given in Fig. 4. The hierarchical
clustering reveals two main clusters of the blank
slate metaphors, those using the tabula rasa meta-
phor of the mind, and those using the blank sheet
metaphor. Additionally, there are several small clus-
ters in which both the tabula rasa and the blank
slate metaphors are used together. Each cluster
might be understood as a specific metaphor, the
whole as a constellation exhibiting close family
resemblance. Clustering metaphors, we see how
terms become synonymous. The scraped wax tablets
of antiquity are updated and survive in poetic dic-
tion. The metaphor survives changing print technol-
ogies; slates are replaced by sheets of paper. In spite
of the changing the material, print-culture environ-
ment, the metaphor persists.
Hierarchical clustering is one method of auto-
mating pattern visualization and discovery in the
library of metaphors. Extending this work in the
direction of author-topic modeling (Rosen-Zvi
et al., 2004) as applied to metaphors may allow
pattern discovery and visualization across much
larger subsets of this collection.
6 Future Work: Increasing
Automation and Collaboration
As has been intimated throughout this article, it is
our intention to collect metaphors from a variety of
historical periods. A new, open, interdisciplinary
site will grow from the core set of metaphors of
mind that was collected over the past three years.
These metaphors constitute the foundation of
the project, but over time the metaphor collection
will continue to grow. Most profitably, the first
additions to the site would include metaphors of
mind harvested from the periods just preceding
and following the eighteenth century. As the collec-
tion of metaphors expands, the website would
become a destination for researchers from every
imaginable discipline. A more complete collection
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
356 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of metaphors would attract an even more diverse
stream of visitors.
6.1 Automated harvesting
The current database of metaphors has been
assembled through manual effort over a number
of years. Machine learning methods can
capitalize on this high-quality training data to
automate the process of harvesting a much larger
set of metaphors. The current database should
be sufficient to exhaust the eighteenth-century
metaphors of the mind available in Chadwyck-
Healey’s electronic collection of English literature.
/-->tabula rasa blank a mind tablet mere -- MacDonnel, David Evans (fl.1797)-1797
|--| _/-->tabula rasa blank paper a mind like -- Anonymous -1748
| | | \_/-->tabula rasa blank paper a mind upon -- Greene, Robert (1678?-1730)-1727
| \-| \_/-->tabula rasa blank paper a mind like -- Fielding, John, Sir (1721-1780)-1763
| | \-->rasa tabula blank paper a mind like -- Fordyce, David (1711-1751)-1745
| |_/-->tabula rasa blank paper a soul mere -- Law, William (1686-1761)-1769
/------| \-->rasa tabula blank paper a soul white -- Westminster Assembly (1643-1652)-1746
| |
| | _/-->tabula rasa paper a sheet soul like -- Anonymous-1742
| | | \_/-->rasa tabula paper a mind mere it -- Greene, Robert (1678?-1730)-1727
| | | \_/-->tabula rasa paper a soul white impressions -- Burnet, Gilbert (1643-1715)-1720
| \--| \-->tabula rasa paper a soul white mind -- Watts, Isaac (1674-1748)-1733
| | /-->rasa tabula page soul written in was -- Peck, Francis (1692-1743)-1732-5
| \-| _/-->rasa tabula to the of grace or -- Jenks, Benjamin (1646-1724)-1757
| | | \-->rasa tabula to the ideas not have -- Sulivan, Richard Joseph, Sie (1752-1806)-1794
| \-| /-->tabula rasa a d like impressions that -- Anonymous -1703-4
| | | /-->rasa tabula a mind tablet it written -- Harris, James (1709-1780)-1775
| | | /-| _/-->tabula rasa a mind impression like it -- Howard, Henry (1540-1614)-1766
| \-| | \-| \-->rasa tabula a mind impression like characters -- Cooke, Thomas (1703-1756)-1742 
| | | | /-->tabula ras a a mind upon it in -- Greene, Robert (1678?-1730)-1727
| | | \-| _/-->rasa tabula a mind mere it in -- Philalethes [pseud.]-1740
-| \-| \-| \-->rasa tabula a mind mere impression it -- Anonymous - 1760
| | | _/-->rasa tabula a it in that to -- Quesnel, Pasquier (1634-1719) -1719-25
| | \-| \-->tabula rasa a impression it susceptible the -- Sharp ,William -1755
| | \-->rasa tabula a mere characters it mr -- Patten, Thomas (1714-1790)-1756
| | _/-->tabula rasa a soul it in to -- Loredano ,Giovanni Francesco (1607-1661)-1748
| \-| \-->tabula rasa a soul it in connate -- Baxter, Richard (1615-1691)-1707
| \-->tabula rasa a soul impressions the of -- Marana, Giovanni Paolo (1642-1693)-1723
|
| _/-->blank a page mind mere it was - -Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646-1716)-1765
| /-| \_/-->blank a mind the receive of for -- Wollstonecraft, Mary (1759-1797)-1792
| /--| | \-->blank a mind mere impressions upon it -- Gwynn, John (bap.1713, d. 1786)-1776
| | | \-->blank soul to world the naked perfect -- Evans, Abel (1679-1737)-1714
| | \-->blank paper upon written to the of -- Aesop; Croxall, Samuel (c.1690-1752)-1747
| | _/-->page white the of youth tinted be -- Barbauld, Anna Letitia (1743-1825)-1825
| | | \_/-->upon it to the not of they --Greene, Robert (1678?-1730)-1727
|------| | \-->the pure her fair by animated grows -- Jenyns, Soame (1704-1787)-1752
| /-| _/-->a mind written to the not of -- Shakespeare -1623
| | | | \_/-->a to blanche charte the we ideas -- Mandeville, Bernard (bap.1670, d. 1733)-1732
| | \-| \_/-->a first to the of are or -- Burton, Robert (1577-1640)-1651
\--| | \-->a it first to booke the we -- Hooker, Richard (1554-1600)-1593
| \-->a mind tablet characters it written in -- Aristotle (384-322 B.C.)-350 B.C.
| _/-->paper white mind characters it to the -- Locke, John (1632-1704)-1690
| | \_/-->paper soul white like that bore his -- Speed, Samuel (d.1681)-1677
\-| \-->paper like clean in scribbled to the -- Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679)-1651
|_/-->paper a soul white it to -- Earle, John (1601-1665)-1628
\_/-->paper a white mind that the philosophers -- Fordyce, David (1711-1751)-1745
\_/-->paper a sheet white mind upon it -- Anonymous - 1770
\_/-->paper a sheet soul white like it -- Charron, Pierre (1541-1603)-1606
\_/-->paper a sheet white impression characters in -- Scott, Sarah (1720-1795)-1762
\_/-->paper a sheet white impression like s -- Godwin, William (1756-1836)-1783
\-->paper a sheet white like of you -- Anonymous-1797
Fig. 4 Hierarchical clustering of blank slate metaphors. This tree shows the results of hierarchical clustering on fifty
metaphors randomly sub-sampled from the Blank Slate data set of 188 metaphors. (A complete hierarchical clustering
on all 188 metaphors in the data set is available online at http://www.eecs.tufts.edu/~dsculley/metaphors/
blankSlate.all.cluster.txt) This automated clustering reveals several of the trends regarding blank slate metaphors of
the mind detailed in the case study
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 357
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
We believe that expanding the database may be
accomplished by beginning with the neighboring
historical periods, such as the seventeenth and nine-
teenth centuries and relying on our models to trans-
fer. In this situation, we expect that the methods of
semi-supervised learning may provide strong benefit.
In semi-supervised learning, a small amount of
labeled training data is used in conjunction with a
large amount of unlabeled training data—in effect,
combining the benefits of supervised classification
and unsupervised clustering (Zhu, 2007) These
methods will provide leverage for our relatively
small seed data set.
However, if we attempt to expand the database of
metaphors into new eras, such as cyberpunk meta-
phors of the mind, or across many languages, it is
unlikely that our current database will yield useful
training data. In this case, additional manual label-
ing effort will be required. The learning curves
shown in Section 3 showed that this effort may
not be prohibitive—perhaps as few as 100 or 200
examples may be enough to begin work in a new
field. We may be able to reduce this initial effort
even further through the use of active learning, in
which a machine learning classifier identifies exam-
ples for which manual labeling will give the most
benefit (Cohn et al., 1995). Previous applications of
active learning have been effective in reducing the
amount of manual labeling necessary to reach
asymptotic classification accuracy, in a number of
fields including text classification (Tong and Koller,
2002).We will find out if it can give similar benefit
in our metaphorical setting.
6.2 Unsupervised analysis
When and how does a vital, poetic metaphor harden
into a few established uses? When, for example, does
Locke’s name come to be finally and ineluctably
associated with the tabula rasa? What would an
exhaustive history of the blank slate—or the
mind’s eye or metaphors of interiority—in English
literature even look like? Will Chaucer’s metaphors
transfer to Joyce’s novels? These are questions that
cannot be answered by one unassisted scholar. In
the long run, manual hunt-and-peck methods will
not do.
Unsupervised methods of pattern recognition
may be applied to this task, and may benefit the
literary analyst. Hierarchical clustering is one
method, but we may also apply clustering methods
such as Expectation Maximization (Duda et al.,
2000) as in author-topic modeling (Rosen-Zvi
et al., 2004) for additional benefit across wider
scales. Methods of anomaly detection may help
the researcher cull unusual or surprising metaphors
hidden in the haystack. Finally, additional methods
of visualization, such as temporal or geographic
mapping, may enable help to show how metaphors
and ideas moved through time and space. These are
the tools that transform a database of metaphors
into a digital library of metaphors. Moving forward,
these tools may be of particular benefit for analyzing
and comparing authors not currently in the canon,
on a large scale across thousands or millions of
texts. This automated analysis can be performed
based on direct textual comparisons, rather than
being restricted to superficial labelings such as reli-
gion, gender, or political affiliation.
It is important to avoid the illusion that auto-
mated analysis is somehow more objective or less
biased than traditional methods. There is no new
infallible science of literature forthcoming. As the
‘No Free Lunch’ Theorem states (Wolpert and
Macready, 1995), every machine learning method
requires the acceptance of base level assumptions,
such as the appropriate choice of distance metric
or the shape of the probability distribution under-
lying the data. These assumptions must, at some
level, be taken on faith, and influence the results
of automated analysis, just as cultural and theoreti-
cal biases influence traditional analysis.
6.3 Metaphorical community
We are interested in the opportunities for further
interdisciplinary collaboration enabled through
online community involvement and automation
with human assistance. Our choice of metaphors of
mind is a studied one, as some concept of person (if
not conceptions of mind or soul) should be readily
located in most cultures and historical periods.
Where histories of the self have almost intrinsic
interest for the self-reflective humanities, the digital
humanities, as here practiced, promise wide-ranging
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
358 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
investigations of linguistic transfer, convergence,
divergence, and rupture. Cognitive and computa-
tional linguists, rhetoricians, literary critics, intellec-
tual historians, psychologists, philosophers, and
neuroscientists would all profit from browsing
through a long, deep history of metaphors for the
mind. A library is not just a collection of books—
nor even a collection of metaphors—but is also a
meeting place for researchers to come together and
share ideas, questions, thoughts, and conversations.
References
Abrams, M. H. (1953). The Mirror and the Lamp:
Romantic Theory and the Critical Tradition.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Aristotle (1973). The Poetics. Introduction to Aristotle,
2nd edn. McKeon, R. (ed. and Trans.). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Austin, J. L. (1961). A plea for excuses. Philosophical
Papers, 1: 175–204.
Bates, C. (1991). Pope’s influence on Shakespeare?
Shakespeare Quarterly, 42: 57–9.
Burges, C. J. C. (1998). A tutorial on support vector
machines for pattern recognition. Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, 2(2): 121–67.
Chang, C. and Lin, C. (2001). LIBSVM: A Library for
Support Vector Machines. Software available at http://
www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/cjlin/libsvm (accessed 20 July
2007).
Cohn, D., Ghahramani, Z., and Jordan, M. (1995).
Active learning with statistical models. In Tesauro, G.,
Touretzky, D. and Leen, T. (eds), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 7. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, pp. 705–12.
Crane, G. (2006). What do you do with a million books?
D-Lib Magazine, 17(3).
Cristianini, N. and Shawe-Taylor, J. (2000). An introduc-
tion to support vector machines. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Curtius, E. R. (1990). European Literature and the Latin
Middle Ages, Bollingen Series XXXVI. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Duda, R., Hart, P., and Stork, D. (2000). Pattern
Classification, 2nd edn. New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Henry, M. (1713). A sermon preach’d at the ordination
of Mr. Atkinson, in London, Jan 7, 1712/13.
London: printed for J. Lawrence; R. Robinson;
N. Cliff and D. Jackson.
Joachims, T. (1998). Text categorization with suport
vector machines: learning with many relevant features.
In ECML ’98: Proceedings of the 10th European
Conference on Machine Learning. Berlin: Springer,
pp. 137–42.
Johnson, S. (1967). A Dictionary of the English Language:
In Which the Words are Deduced from their Originals,
and Illustrated in their Different Significations by
Examples from the Best Writers. To Which Are
Prefixed, a History of the Language, and an English
Grammar. New York: AMS Press.
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we Live By.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leissner, D. (1995). Pope, petrarch, and shakespeare:
renaissance influences in ‘eloisa to abelard’.
Philological Quarterly, 74: 173–88.
Locke, J. (1975). An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lonsdale, R. (ed.) (1989). Eighteenth-Century Women
Poets. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maclean, K. (1962). John Locke and English Literature
of the Eighteenth Century. New York: Russell &
Russell, Inc.
Mitchell, T. M. (1997). Machine Learning. McGraw-Hill.
Pasanek, B. (2006). Eighteenth Century Metaphors of the
Mind, a Dictionary. Doctoral dissertation, Stanford
University.
Ramsay, S. (2005). In praise of pattern. TEXT
Technology, 14: 177–90.
Rosen-Zvi, M., Griffiths, T., Steyvers, M., and Smyth, P.
(2004). The author-topic model for authors and
documents. In AUAI ’04: Proceedings of the 20th
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence.
Arlington, VA: AUAI Press, pp. 487–94.
Salton, G. and Buckley, C. (1988). Term-weighting
approaches in automatic text retrieval. Information
Processing and Management, 24(5): 513–23.
Scholkopf, B. and Smola, A. (2002). Learning with
Kernels. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sneath, P. and Sokal, R. (1973). Numerical Taxonomy;
the Principles and Practice of Numerical Classification.
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Stolcke, A. Cluster 2.9, 1996. Available at http://www.
icsi.berkeley.edu/ftp/global/pub/ai/stolcke/software/
cluster-2.9.tar.Z (accessed 20 July 2007).
Mining millions of metaphors
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 359
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Tong, S. and Koller, D. (2002). Support vector
machine active learning with applications to text
classification. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2:
45–66.
Witten, I. H. and Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining:
Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques,
2nd edn. San Francisco: Morgan Kaufman.
Wolpert, D. H. and Macready, W. G. (1995). No free
lunch theorems for search. Technical report, Santa Fe
Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA.
Yolton, J. W. (1993). A Locke Dictionary. Blackwell
Philosopher Dictionaries.
Zhu, X. (2007). Semi-supervised Learning Literataure
Survey. Technical Report 1530. Madison: University
of Wisconsin-Madison.
Notes
1 Chadwyck-Healey, the main text collection drawn
upon, is accessed through a custom search interface
hosted at Stanford University Library. The search
interface is called HUGO. It is a system for browsing
and searching texts encoded in Standard Generalized
Markup Language (SGML). Stanford digital librarian
Glen Worthey informs us that the principal program-
mer, Rick Wong, named the program after Hugo de
St. Caro, or Cardinal Hugo, compiler of the first
concordance. A brief history of HDIS is available at
http://library.stanford.edu/depts/hasrg/hdis/about.
html. HDIS’s main British and Irish literature resource
page is available at http://www-sul.stanford.edu/depts/
hasrg/hdis/text-brit.html. ECCO may be found at
http://galenet.galegroup.com/servlet/ECCO; EEBO at
http://eebo.chadwyck.com/home.
2 http://www.cs.bham.ac.uk/~ jab/ATT-Meta/Databank
3 http://www1.uni-hamburg.de/metaphern/index_en.
html
4 http://cogsci.berkeley.edu/lakoff
5 Barnden has collected 1,070 ‘manifestations’ of meta-
phor from texts and sixty-five additional speech
examples.
6 Although, we do not find the irregular spellings of this
period to have significant impact in our experiments,
the problem of canonicalizing irregular spellings is an
area for interesting future work. Martin Mueller is
currently exploring hand-tuned approaches for this
task; algorithmic ‘spell checking’ approaches using
either string-based or phoneme-based edit distances
are also possible.
7 On the Shakespearean aspects of Pope’s poetry, see,
for example, Leissner (1995), Because turnabout is fair
play and the models transfer in both directions, we
might just as well cite Bates (1991).
8 We take seriously Stephen Ramsay’s repeated recom-
mendation to pay attention to the anomalies. See,
for example, his insistence that curious anomalies
may ‘appear to conform to some of the more
famous critical statements’ in certain interesting
cases (Ramsay, 2005).
9 See, for example, the following canonical statement by
Maclean: ‘The literature immediately following Locke
. . . abounds with notions of the mind as a tabula
rasa, with democratic conceptions of mental equality,
and with the idea of ruling passions, each of which
owes it rise to Locke’s denial of innate ideas’ (1962).
10 Locke’s argument against innate ideas is addressed to a
hot of seventeenth-century Rationalists, Cambridge
Platonists, and theologians. A compressed account
of Locke’s metaphor and its place in the context of
the seventeenth-century philosophy is available in
Yolton (1993).
11 In the preface of a translation of Giovanni Marana’s
popular Turkish Spy the blank slate is associated
with the philosophy of Rene´ Descartes. Where
Gassendi and Locke employ the blank slate metaphor
in order to qualify or overturn a Cartesian model
of the mind, Marana details how the Cartesian
practice of hyperbolical doubt cleans and polishes
the soul so that it becomes a ‘Tabula Rasa’ (Preface).
Moreover, Marana is not alone in his association
of Cartesian philosophy with the tabula rasa. In the
entry on John Maldonat in an eighteenth-century
English translation of Pierre Bayle’s Dictionary,
we find the following assertion: ‘We must examine
every thing, as if we were a tabula rasa. This is doubt-
less what Des Cartes intended, when he would have his
Philosopher doubt of every thing, before he examines
the reasons of the certainty of it’ (vol. iv, 81).
B. Pasanek and D. Sculley
360 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
