
I always say that you cannot tell what a picture
really is or what an object really is until you
dust it every day and you cannot tell what a
book is until you type it or proof-read it. It
then does something to you that only reading
never can do.
Gertrude Stein, The Autobiography of Alice B.
Toklas, 113
The particular reading difficulties engendered by the
complicated patterns of repetition in The Making of
Americans mirror those a reader might face attempt-
ing to read a large collection of like texts at once
without getting lost—likewise, it is almost impossi-
ble to read this text in a traditional, linear manner.
However, by visualizing certain patterns and looking
at the text ‘from a distance’ through textual analytics
and visualizations, we are enabled to make readings
that were formerly inhibited. Franco Moretti has
argued that the solution to truly incorporating a
more global perspective in our critical literary prac-
tices is not to read more of the vast amounts of
literature available to us, but to read it differently
by employing ‘distant reading’. ‘We know how to
read texts’, he writes, ‘now let’s learn how not to read
them’ (Moretti, 2000, p. 57). Similarly, by learning
Correspondence:
Tanya E. Clement, 2015
Rosemont Ave. NW,
Washington, DC 20010, USA.
E-mail:
tclement@umd.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
361
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn020 Advance Access Published on 16 September 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to read texts that have been misread ‘at a distance’,
we are reading differently and we value different
readings.
1 Misreading The Making of
Americans
Although lauded by a handful of critics who thought
Stein accomplished what Ezra Pound demanded of
all Modernist writers (to make art, literature, and
language ‘new’), The Making of Americans (1925)
was criticized by most of its early twentieth century
readers who claimed the text was unreadable, that
its author wrote ‘a disaster’ by creating ‘tireless and
inert repetitiveness which becomes as stupefying as
it is unintelligible’, and that it ‘amounts in the end
to linguistic murder’ (Aiken, 1934, p. 39). In the
twenty-first century, critics still bemoan the novel
as ‘monumentally tedious’, with one critic arguing
that Making proves Stein ‘is really a terrible novelist
with not the vaguest sense of what constitutes a
novel’ (Levitt, 2001, p. 505). Some critics have
concluded that the text goes unread because it is
inchoate—the early work of an inexperienced
author—and as such its constant repetition repre-
sents a style of writing that is chaotic, unsystematic,
and virtually impossible to read.1 Even so, an appre-
ciation of the text does surface among postmoder-
nist critics who argue that the text represents
a postmodern exercise in incomprehensibility that
in itself poses a comment on the modernist desire
for identity and truth.2 According to this argument,
the confusion Making elicits is a challenge to read-
erly subjectivity by evoking indeterminacy and
deconstructing the role language and writing plays
in determining identity. To be sure, understanding
The Making of Americans in terms of this perspec-
tive, whether it is a focus on issues of race, class,
gender, and sex, or the very complexity with which
all these factors combine in each of us, is to focus on
the importance of the form Stein uses to express
that drive to construct identity. Whether repetition
functions much like frames in a movie reel in which
‘each picture is just infinitesimally different from
the one before’ (Wald, 1995, p. 295) or whether
repetition identifies agency ‘figured as an effect of
grammar’ (Taylor, 2003, p. 27), the repetitive form,
critics argue, renders the reader’s usual processes of
making meaning useless and emphasizes the fact
that ‘Sense-making is a fundamentally cultural
activity’ (Wald, 1995, p. 297).
Clearly, reading The Making of Americans is dif-
ficult work. Even the text’s narrator warns the
reader that this tome ‘is not just an ordinary kind
of novel with a plot and conversations to amuse
you’ (162).3 ‘I have created a lot of characters [in
Making]’, she says elsewhere, ‘but that is another
story’ (Stein, 1971, p. 507). Stein clarifies these
assertions by comparing The Making of Americans
to James Joyce’s Ulysses and Marcel Proust’s A` la
Recherche du Temps Perdu to the extent that these
novels also foreground the process of meaning-
making rather than meaning itself. This is a differ-
ence that becomes salient when discussing a book
Stein claims she meant ‘to be the history of a
family’, but which became the history of history-
making itself or ‘a history of all human beings, all
who ever were or are or could be living’
(Stein, 1933, p. 56). If what Stein means by this
comparison is that what the characters do and say
is no longer significant without a consideration for
the composition of the text, then critics are correct
in one sense: the style of The Making of Americans
does generate meaning. Repetition plays a profound
role (there are 517,207 total words and only 5,329
unique words); more abstract and indeterminate
verbs such as forms of ‘to be’ predominate (‘he
was’ occurs 4,219 times and ‘to be’ 3,830 times);
and personal pronouns proliferate in an inordinate
degree over proper names—all of which serves to
disambiguate human categorization more than it
serves to categorize, ontologize, diagram, or type
it. As such, The Making of Americans does confront
readers directly with the failings of representation
and the creative possibilities of alternative uses of
language. On the other hand, it may be argued that
incomprehension was not the goal of the text.
‘Repeating is the whole of living’, the narrator
writes in the first chapter, ‘and by repeating comes
understanding, and understanding is to some the
most important part of living (846)’. As such, a
question arises that has not been adequately
addressed: is the confusion the repetition engenders
T. E. Clement
362 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a byproduct of reading meant to deconstruct pro-
cesses of identity construction by making meaning
through methods that ultimately elude meaning-
making? Or, alternatively, is the confusion the repe-
tition engenders the result of a misreading and
simply a byproduct of our inability to read the text?
2 Distant-Reading The Making of
Americans
Initial analysis on The Making of Americans within
the MONK project4 has yielded evidence that sug-
gests that the text is intricately and purposefully
structured. For example, using the Data to
Knowledge (D2K) application environment for data
mining5 has generated data that reflects co-occurring
frequent patterns based on paragraphs made up of
n-grams.6 In the D2K analysis, establishing co-
occurring patterns in The Making of Americans is a
function of moving a window over trigrams (a three-
word series), one word at a time, until each para-
graph has been analyzed.7 Looking at n-grams in
particular allows for an element of ‘fuzzy matching’
that is quite productive when looking at repetition
with variation because it facilitates searching for like
patterns that are not exact duplicates. First, each
sentence is parsed such that a sentence like, ‘This is
now a description of all of them’ is broken into seven
trigrams: ‘This is now’, ‘is now a’, ‘now a descrip-
tion’, ‘a description of ’, ‘description of all’, ‘of all of’,
‘all of them’. Executing the frequent pattern analysis
algorithm on these trigrams in The Making of
Americans yields a result in which subsets of trigrams
are produced such as these four: ‘a description of’,
‘now a description’, ‘this is now’, and ‘is now a’
which co-occur in three different sentences in three
different paragraphs (see Fig. 1).
Executing the frequent pattern analysis algorithm
on longer n-grams also produces matches of greater
length. For instance, an analysis executed on
36-grams produces a subset of co-occurring patterns
that enabled the discovery of two, multi-paragraph
sections of approximately 500 words. This discovery
presents an unusual pattern in the text since these
sections share—verbatim—the same 495 words
(1726–7 and 1823–4). The same discovery
would have been difficult with a string search
since to search for these sections would depend on
pre-knowledge that they exist—a nontrivial feat in
the midst of the more pervasive and shorter repeti-
tions that make up each section. The loss and the
subsequent discovery of these paragraphs, however,
serves to pique interest not only in the presence of
larger patterns that move across—rather than
within or between—the chaos of the more frequent
repetitions, but also in whatever else readers may
have missed with close reading.
One such ‘missed’ pattern is discoverable through
a tool called FeatureLens, which we designed within
the MONK project to visualize the text patterns pro-
vided by the D2K application.8 FeatureLens lists the
text patterns provided by D2K according to their
length and frequency (see Fig. 2, area ‘A’) and pro-
vides a visualization of the text’s nine chapters at the
chapter level and at the paragraph level (Fig. 2, ‘C’).9
These two levels of granularity allow the user to
identify meaningful trends within patterns across
the text. It also enables the analysis of the different
contexts in which those patterns occur (Fig. 2, ‘D’).
For instance, if we visualize ten of the top twenty
most frequently co-occurring patterns in the text,10
such as ‘living’, ‘feeling’, ‘beginning’, ‘as I was|I was
saying’, ‘men and women’, ‘children’, ‘history’,
‘one of them’, ‘kind of them’, and ‘being in them’,
(Fig. 2, ‘B’) we are presented with a seemingly chao-
tic pattern of repeated phrases that appear very
frequently across the text (Fig. 2, ‘C’).
This ‘muddle’ of data pictured across the nine
chapters in area ‘C’ is unsurprising considering
that the narrator’s goal is to describe the complete
history of the three Hersland children
(David, Alfred, and Martha) by describing their
kind of being, including their living and feeling,
how they repeat each other’s behaviors and actions,
Paragraph Sentence
1076 This is now a description of such feeling. 
1080 This is now a description of my feeling. 
1081 This is now a description of all of them. 
Fig. 1 Finding three similar sentences in Making with the
D2K frequent pattern analysis algorithm
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 363
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and how they repeat the actions and behaviors of
those around them. On closer inspection, however,
we begin to see a larger structural pattern within the
first chapter that is repeated throughout the first
half of the novel. Namely, gaps appear within
the most frequently occurring patterns (see 1, 2,
and 3 in Fig. 3). The gap marked ‘3’ in Fig. 3
would be familiar to most critics: the context
proves it is the ‘Hodder’ or Redfern episode in
chapter 4. The ‘Hodder Episode’ is so-named and
considered significant because this short narrative
mirrors an incident that occurred in Stein’s circle
of friends (between Mary Gwinn and Alfred
Hodder) which Stein also fictionalizes in Q.E.D, a
novel that Stein was unable to publish in her life
time, because—most critics contend—it portrays a
lesbian affair. The episode as it is written in The
Making of Americans features two women in an
ambiguous relationship, one of whom (Cora
Dounor) has an affair with Martha Hersland’s
husband Phillip Redfern (who supposedly
represents Alfred Hodder’s fictional counterpart).
The biographical component added with the con-
tention that this story marks ‘the longest sustained
narrative in the plot’ makes this episode ‘a key for
the overall project’ (Wald, 1995, p. 286) for many
critics.13 By generating a list of peak data points,
however, we see that there are other narratives.
For example, sorting the list by trends such as co-
occurring patterns that ‘spike’ or increase in fre-
quency suddenly across a shorter distribution of
data points14 yields 7,000 results that comprise
words and phrases—such as ‘repeating’, ‘a whole
one’, and ‘a history of’—which the narrator uses
intermittently to remark on the process of creating
her history. Clustered within the top twenty-five
results of this new sorting, however, another the-
matic trend appears. Proper names such as
‘Mabel’, ‘Madeleine’, ‘Wyman’, and ‘Linker’
appear alongside ‘Redfern’ (the character who
appears most often in the Hodder Episode gap).
It is not surprising that the names appear as
Fig. 2 Chapters 1–9, FeatureLens.11 (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing
online.)
T. E. Clement
364 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
trends that peak within the text since the text is
spotted with short narratives starring these charac-
ters, but it is illuminating that visualizing these
trends makes clear the extent to which the Hodder
episode is unexceptional. To illustrate this pattern,
the following visualization plots these character
names against the pervasive ‘children’ pattern iden-
tified previously (Figs 2 and 3). Below, in Fig. 4 and
Fig. 5, ‘children’ is represented in the left-most
column (in red in the supplementary data, available
in Literary and Linguistic Computing online).15
The pattern of intermittent, short narratives that
feature central character becomes clear when it is
seen as gaps within the pervasive ‘children’ pattern:
in chapter 1: ‘julia’ and ‘shilling’ appear; in chapter 2:
‘mabel’ and ‘lillian’; in chapter 3: ‘I’ [the narrator]; in
chapter 4: ‘redfern’; and in chapter 5: ‘arragon’. A
coherent pattern emerges in which the repetitive,
abstract, and generalized discussions of the ‘Three
Hersland Children’ alternate between narratives
about related characters. What is also clear is that
one narrative (the Hodder episode) is not a key that
will open the text’s meaning—as if meaning resided
in a buried treasure chest or behind a locked door.
Truly, a lock ‘key’ is an ill-used metaphor that has led
to misreading this text since no one point of entry
appears to serve how the text may be read as a whole.
Perhaps a more useful metaphor for reading The
Making of Americans is one that connotes a guide-
line for reading the direction, distance, and topo-
graphy of a geographical location—a map key.
Appropriately, a map key or legend allows the
reader to understand what is being represented
and the scale by which these items are being repre-
sented in relationship to each other as they progress
across the geography of the text. Before we read the
legend, however, we orient ourselves to the map.
3 Distant Reading The Making of
Americans
The Making of Americans is divided into five main
sections that comprise nine chapters.16 The chapters
are untitled but Stein (with Alice B. Toklas) proof-
read the typescript (Gallup, 1973, p. 214) and
inserted title pages between groupings of chapters
creating one untitled and four titled sections. The
first section is untitled (chapters 1 and 2) and the
second is titled ‘Martha Hersland’ (chapters 3
and 4); the third is ‘Alfred Hersland and Julia
Dehning’ (chapters 5 and 6); finally, ‘David
Hersland’ (chapters 7 and 8) and ‘History of a
Fig. 3 Narrative gaps, chapters 1–6, FeatureLens.12 (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and
Linguistic Computing online.)
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 365
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Family’s Progress’ (chapter 9) comprise the fourth
and fifth sections.17 The following scatter plot serves
as a map of the repetitions across the text according
to their length and location where location is the
starting point of the repetition as it is expressed in
a running count starting with number 1000016.18
The x-axis plots these locations across all nine chap-
ters and the y-axis plots the length of each repeated
string (including both words and punctuation)
from 3 to 197 tokens. Each colored column of
plotted dots represents one of the nine chapters.
The black horizontal lines connecting the dots on
the plot are lines indicating matching patterns.
The visualization that appears in Fig. 6 shows a
trend for longer repetitions in the first half of the
text with the longest repetition happening exactly in
Fig. 5 Narrative gaps filled, chapters 7–9, FeatureLens. (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and
Linguistic Computing online.)
Fig. 4 Narrative gaps filled, chapters 1–6, FeatureLens. (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and
Linguistic Computing online.)
T. E. Clement
366 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the center of the text, straddling chapters 4 (in black)
and 5 (in green) (colour image available as supple-
mentary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing
online). The long repeated section co-occurs in the
Dalkey Archive Press 1995 edition on pages 443 and
480, respectively, making the midpoint between
them page 462, which is also the exact center of
this 924-page book. Reading from the left, the repe-
titions rise in length in chapters 2, 4, and 5, and
descend again in the later chapters 6, 7, and 8 until
the longer repetitions are indiscernible on this scale
by chapter 9. What is clear from this map of repeated
patterns is that Stein has marked the center of the
book and that there is a change in the form between
the two halves of the text. What is not yet clear is
what that change is and why it occurs.
In order to use this visualization to understand
this transformation, what is being measured in the
visualization must be clarified. The scatter plot fea-
tured in Fig. 6 has been created from a database of
repeated phrases derived from the text.19 Each item
in the database is an independently recurring string
within the text (including characters and punctua-
tion) that occurs at a specific location.20 For example,
if the four-token string ‘abcd’ occurs twice in the text
(once in chapter 1 and once in chapter 9) it appears
twice in the database with two different locations but
the same ID. The count of occurrence is based on a
closed set so subsets of these two instances of ‘abcd’
are not included in the database; however, if one of
the substrings occurs independently in another loca-
tion within the text (e.g. ‘ab’ also occurs one other
time in chapter 4) the database includes the two
instances of ‘abcd’ and the three instances of ‘ab’
with a new ID. According to Table 1 (which repre-
sents an excerpt from the database of repetitions),
Fig. 6 Repetitions (x-axis ¼ location, y-axis ¼ length), Spotfire. (Colour image available as supplementary data in
Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 367
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the string ‘one coming to be almost an old one. Any
one’ occurs only twice in the text, both times in
chapter 9 and shown here. The subset string ‘to be
almost an old one’ occurs three times in chapter 9 (all
shown here) but thirty-six times over the course of
the text. The three paragraphs shown in Fig. 7 illus-
trate the complexity with which the overlapping
repetition occurs in chapter 9.21
Figure 8 illustrates the same information from
the scatter plot view: the top repetition with ID
137374 is ‘one coming to be almost an old one.
Any one’. It occurs twice here, and as the longest
string in this block of paragraphs, it is positioned
highest on the y-axis. The two matches are con-
nected by a line. The shorter string ‘to be almost
an old one’ (ID 137343) is positioned below the
previous match where it occurs three times, and
the line that links it to its match runs through
other matches of the same length (10 tokens),
making that line indistinguishable.
Decidedly, it is difficult to visualize the relation-
ship between the shorter, more frequent repetitions
and the longer, less frequent repetitions since their
multiple connections are lost in the mass of dots
and lines pictured at the bottom of the visualiza-
tions in Figs 6 and 8. Patterns in Chapter 9, zoomed
(x-axis ¼ location, y-axis ¼ length), Spotfire. For, it
is not just that words are repeated, but also the
length of the repetitions and the frequency with
which they occur. As such, the combination of
longer, less frequent repeated patterns and shorter,
more frequent repeated patterns creates a visual
affect that mimics the experience of reading the
complex patterning of the text as a whole: confus-
ing. Once we begin to recognize this distinction
between shorter, more frequent repetitions and
longer, less frequent repetitions, reorienting the
data to visualize these patterns is possible.
For instance, the repetition ID, as a one-to-many
representative, has associated with it all the informa-
tion for each instance of each repetition, including
how frequently that repetition occurs, its length,
and where the repetition appears first and last. As
such, the ID may function as the combinatory form
of the repetition. Accordingly, this ID may be used
to discern each repetition’s behavior across the text.
Plotting the behavior of a repetition as one object
(instead of each repeated occurrence within that
group) decreases the data plotted on the graph
and, therefore, the ‘noise’, providing for a clearer
mapping of the textual patterns. For instance,
Table 2 includes the database information pertain-
ing to repetition ID 9872 (‘any such a thing’).
According to Table 2, repetition ID 9872 occurs
ten times across the text, first in chapter 1 (location
1016602) and then in chapters 2, 5, 6, 7, and finally
in chapter 8 (location 1519323). Because the
sequence IDs in this database are numbered to
represent the order of the first occurrence of each
repeated sequence as it occurs in the text, plotting
the repeated patterns by this ID means that we may
plot each sequence by its first appearance in the text.
At the same time, because the color of the marker
indicates the location of each ID’s final occurrence
in the text, the end point for each sequence is also
visualized. In addition, treating each repetitive pat-
tern as a single object makes it possible to visualize
and compare the three dimensions upon which each
repetition co-occurs—by length, frequency, and
location. In this way, we are able to distinguish
where each pattern begins, ends, how often it
occurs, and its length in a single view. For instance,
in Figs 10 and 11, the y-axis represents a sequence’s
length, the z-axis represents its count (frequency),
and the x-axis illustrates where each pattern
begins in the order in which it first appears in the
Table 1 Excerpted data from the repeated phrases database
Chapter Location ID Length Count Repetition
9 1552187 137374 11 2 One coming to be almost an old one. Any one
9 1552345 137374 11 2 One coming to be almost an old one. Any one
9 1552189 137343 6 36 To be almost an old one
9 1552023 137343 6 36 To be almost an old one
9 1552347 137343 6 36 To be almost an old one
T. E. Clement
368 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
text. The color of a pattern shows where it last
appears.
In Fig. 9, ID 9872 is plotted where it first appears,
in a location on the far left side of the x-axis (i.e. in
the general location of chapter 1) but the lavender
color, which represents chapter 8, indicates that ID
9872 appears last in that chapter. In Figs 10 and 11
the behavior of each unique combinatory repetitive
object is represented. Since, the color (Colour
images available as supplementary data in Literary
and Linguistic Computing online) and the position
of each object corresponds to each repetitive object’s
movement across the text, the distinct structural
difference between the first and second halves of
the text is well illustrated. At first glance, it appears
that many of the repetitions remain ‘local’ since
Fig. 8 Patterns in Chapter 9, zoomed (x-axis ¼ location, y-axis ¼ length), Spotfire. (Colour image available as
supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
Fig. 7 Paragraphs 3067–3070. (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing
online.)
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 369
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
plotting the IDs in this manner corresponds to a
sequential chapter mapping from left to right
much like the one that appears in Fig. 6. This first
impression is the result of the fact that many of the
repetitive objects appear first and last in the same
chapter. Consequently, many of the combinatory
objects maintain both the color and the relative
sequential position in accordance with the discrete
mappings in Fig. 6. On closer inspection, however,
another pattern emerges. The figure is actually
skewed in comparison to Fig. 6. Chapters 6, 7,
and 8 take up considerably less space on this
image. The longer repetitive objects, which we are
better able to discern on the y-axis in Figs 10 and 11,
are more consistently local in the first five chapters;
they represent the illustration in Fig. 6. In compar-
ison, the shorter repetitive objects that occur on the
z-axis in Figs 10 and 11 do not mimic that visuali-
zation. These repetitive objects (primarily colored in
the pastel shades that represent the chapters of the
Table 2 Excerpt of data from the repeated phrases database
ID Length Count Repetition Location Chapter
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1016602 1
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1100331 2
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1310177 5
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1310391 5
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1414671 6
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1445344 7
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1463523 7
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1506677 8
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1507294 8
9872 4 10 any such a thing 1519323 8
Fig. 9 ID 9872 plotted on 3D scatter plot (x-axis ¼ location, y-axis ¼ length, z-axis ¼ frequency), Spotfire. (Colour
image available as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
T. E. Clement
370 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
latter half of the text) are erratic; they are scattered
without apparent order across the lower wall. As a
result, we can discern from this visualization an
overall pattern for the text that has been previously
undiscovered: the longer and less frequent repeti-
tions are usually local to the first half of the text
while the shorter, more frequent repetitions run
across the text as a whole.
But what does this mapping mean in terms of
analyzing the text for meaning? How does this
map—this reading at a distance—facilitate an alter-
native direction or perspective for reading the text?
To this end, chapter 9 provides the legend: it is a
measurement of relative scale by which we can read
the greater map. Understanding how chapter 9 is
structured aids how we can understand the larger
text. Stein refers to chapter 9 as a ‘rhapsody’ perhaps
alluding to one definition of the term which denotes
an unstructured, often passionate, instrumental
composition (Stein, 1974, p. 503; Oxford English
Dictionary, 1989). However, it is equally reasonable
to assume that she thought of the word’s other
definition: ‘an epic poem or part of one, e.g. a
book of the Iliad or Odyssey, suitable for recitation
at one time’ (Oxford English Dictionary; emphasis
added) and conceived of chapter 9 as such a compo-
sitional object—part of the larger text but complete
in and of itself. As such, its structure warrants a closer
look. Chapter 9 comprises 18.5 pages (the exact dis-
tance from each set of long repetitions in chapters 4
and 5 to the center of the text) and its title mirrors the
text’s title (‘History of a Family’s Progress’) minus
what perambulates the larger text—the narrator’s
discussion of the ‘making’ of that history. By chapter
9, the narrator has dropped out, the characters that
no longer appear, and a general family history (not
the particular Hersland family history) is told.
Furthermore, mapping repetitions limited to
chapter 9 on a scatter plot (Fig. 12), illustrates a
pattern very similar to the first half of the larger
text (Fig. 6) in that shorter, more frequent repeti-
tions are nested between longer, less frequent repe-
titions that usually occur in pairs (e.g. the match
marked ‘A’).22 At the same time, this mapping
Fig. 10 Repetition ID plotted on 3D scatter plot (x-axis ¼ location, y-axis ¼ length, z-axis ¼ frequency), Spotfire.
(Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 371
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 11 Repetition plotted on 3D scatter plot (x-axis ¼ location, y-axis ¼ length, z-axis ¼ frequency), Spotfire. (Colour
image available as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
Fig. 12 Chapter 9, Spotfire. (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
T. E. Clement
372 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
appears to contradict what appears in Fig. 6 where
chapter 9 is much like the second half of the text in
which repeated strings are shorter and not so varied
in length.
That mapping of chapter 9 reflects characteristics
from both halves of the text does not present a
contradiction so much as to indicate a relative
scale for reading the formally complex patterns
that result from combining those two halves
together. Chapter 9 comprises 557 sentences with
only 238 unique words. Within it, there are seven-
teen simple yet abstract declarative sentences that
are repeated verbatim. The significance of this
base of seventeen sentences is emphasized by the
fact that they are the only sentences repeated
exactly in a chapter that is otherwise a cacophony
of minute variations. The other sentences corre-
spond to the base sentences as either a change or
a compound of the base sentence’s subject, subject
phrase, verb, or verb phrase. Consequently, the sen-
tences that precede and follow a base sentence
usually draw on the theme of the base sentence
and then radiate or expand its meaning. For exam-
ple, the first paragraph of chapter 9 follows:
Any one has come to be a dead one. Any one
has not come to be such a one to be a dead
one. Many who are living have not come yet
to be a dead one. Many who were living have
come to be a dead one. Any one has come not
to be a dead one. Any one has come to be a
dead one. (3064; emphasis added)
In the above paragraph, the variation sentences are
nested between two instances of the sentence ‘Any
one has come to be a dead one’ (shown in bold) and
may be read as variations used to make this ‘book-
end’ sentence more distinct. Correspondingly, the
meaning of the base sentence is understood to be a
function of the truth of the other statements. For
instance, that ‘Any one has come to be a dead one’
is predicated by the fact that any one is living or ‘has
not come to be such a one to be a dead one’. Another
example appears towards the end of the chapter.
The sentence, ‘Old ones come to be dead’ (A) is
repeated three times. After its first appearance,
another repeated sentence—‘Any one coming to be
an old enough one comes then to be a dead one’
(B)—occurs. A and B are followed by simple
variations, such as ‘Old ones come to be dead
ones’ and then more complex variations such as
‘Any one not coming to be a dead one before
coming to be an old one comes to be an old one
and comes then to be a dead one as any old one
comes to be a dead one’ (3166). More variations
follow, but repetitions A and B remain interspersed
making an ABAAB pattern. As such, we see what
happens when combinations are formed: the mean-
ing of declaration A (‘Old ones come to be dead’) is
coupled with declaration B in such a way that the
term ‘old ones’ becomes forever trapped in a circular
ontological stance. Pulled out by a centrifugal force
of indeterminacy (‘any one coming to be an old
enough one’ ¼ old one) and the centripetal force
of utter determinacy (dead ¼ old one), there is an
epistemological vortex present here (‘I won’t know if
I’m an old enough one until I’m dead and then I may
not know anything anyway’) encapsulated in the
juxtaposition of two simple (albeit abstract) declara-
tions. The resulting combination of utterances forms
the composition of a complete thought as it is
expressed over time. Correspondingly, the two
halves of the larger text function in much the same
way: just as the variations on the ‘base’, sentences in
chapter 9 are complicated by the rearrangements
introduced by subsequent sentences, the function
of the second half of the text is to develop complex-
ities and contradictions that complicate the knowl-
edge produced in the first half of the text by using the
same words and sequences introduced there, but
using them in variation.
This analysis has shown that Making is structured
as a determinate object that progresses with its two
distinct halves as interdependent forces. These new
mappings of the text are important when considering
The Making of Americans as a modernist text, since
from this new perspective (afforded by the digital
analysis of the larger text) it can be argued that inde-
terminacy is not privileged as an essential reading.
4 Reading The Making of
Americans Closer, Differently
Yet, the fact that reading the text yields much con-
fusion is undeniable. ‘Each part is as important as
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 373
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the whole’, Stein writes about The Making of
Americans and as such, ‘it was not solely the realism
of the characters but the realism of the composition
which was the important thing, the realism of the
composition of my thoughts’ (Stein, 1971, p. 502).
As such, the text itself is the real-time reckoning of
the human tendency to balance determinate and
indeterminate knowledge and its expression, and as
such, the relationships established between the parts
of the text, whether it be the combination of words,
phrases, sentences, paragraphs, whole sections, or
themes, is not a means to this end so much as the
end itself.23
During the writing of Making, Stein was very
interested in the notion of art as the composed or
constructed object, especially as she saw it codified
and practiced in the creative work of Ce´zanne and
Picasso, each of whom she viewed as a ‘master of the
realisation of the object itself ’ (quoted in Walker,
1984, p. 19). Accordingly, Making is not merely
‘about’ American identity but an object of twentieth
century Americanness that necessarily entails an ele-
ment of indeterminacy as a compositional part.
Clearly, Stein believed that there was a symbiotic
relationship between the composition’s structure
and what it expressed: ‘the twentieth century was
the century not of sentences as was the eighteenth
not of phrases as was the nineteenth but of para-
graphs’, she says, and ‘The Making of Americans
really carried it as far as it could be carried so I
think the making a whole paragraph a whole thing’
(Stein, 1975, p. 285). In other words, what seems
indeterminate in the process of charting and describ-
ing every possible variety of human type is also what
becomes indeterminate in the intricate and complex
expression of repetition with variation. For instance,
one element that makes the composition of identity
and the composition of Stein’s thoughts unknowable
or indeterminate is time. It was ‘not enough’, Stein
says, ‘to satisfy myself with a whole thing as a para-
graph as a whole thing . . . at the same time is the
question of time’ (Stein, 1975, p. 285). That is to
say, time—especially as it functions in linear narra-
tives—acts as a hierarchical force rendering combi-
natory forms irrelevant since the iteration of type
over linear time privileges the ‘latest update’ and
makes each previous iteration inherently unequal.
Accordingly, Stein wished to embattle the inevitable
line that time draws in traditional narrative in order
to show that each human utterance of character is
an equally important signifier of type regardless of
the moment in life (in one’s story) in which it is
uttered: ‘as soon as a child is conscious of itself’,
she says, ‘then it has to me an existence and has a
stake in what happens. Everybody who has that stake
has that quality of interest’ (Stein, 1971, p. 503).
In reality, the child who is conscious of himself
anticipates the man he will become just as the man
recalls the child he once was—consequently, the
combinatory form exists in each phase and shapes
the ‘endless surprises’ of human nature. In addition,
Stein was aware that her ‘failure’ to make the com-
position of her thoughts real (or ‘whole’) was also a
contingency of time:
When I was up against the difficulty of put-
ting down the complete conception that I had
of an individual, the complete rhythm of a
personality that I had gradually acquired by
listening seeing feeling and experience. I was
faced by the trouble that I had acquired all of
this knowledge gradually but when I had it I
had it completely at one time. And a great deal
of The Making of Americans was a struggle to
do this thing, to make a whole present of
something that it had taken a great deal of
time to find out, but it was a whole there
within me and as such it had to be said
(Stein 1975, pp. 277–278).
In fact, this ever-present contradiction that Stein
recognized as the simultaneous occurrence of a
‘moving’ knowledge that has an immediate aspect
(‘knowledge-of-acquaintance’) and a more static
‘knowledge about’24 element moved Stein to create
a text that instantiates what she determined was a
way of accessing both, while also satisfying
her desire to write what she called a specifically
twentieth-century American novel. In other words,
Stein found a motive to use a combinatory structure
that embodies both the formation of ‘self’ or being
in a nation that was just beginning to know itself
and her own process for expressing that formation:
Think of anything, of cowboys, of movies, of
detective stories, of anybody who goes
T. E. Clement
374 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
anywhere or stays at home and is an American
and you will realize that it is something
strictly American to conceive a space that is
filled with moving, a space of time that is
filled always filled with moving and my first
real attempt to express this thing which is an
American thing began in writing The Making
of Americans (Stein, 1975, pp. 285–286).
This is to say, in her attempt to construct this object
that is a space ‘filled with moving’ and the ‘contin-
uous present’—a space in which hierarchical forces
of space and time are suspended—she is attempting
to concretize (make a complete object of) the non-
hierarchical, combinatory structure of human char-
acter as it is expressed over time. As a result, Stein
has given her readers the same experience that the
narrator and her characters who are confused about
the process of knowing and expressing themselves
over time experience: confusion.
With a new perspective facilitated by mapping the
larger structure, however, we learn to read the text
differently. For instance, instead of focusing on the
Hodder episode as a singular point of entry, we begin
to weigh the significance of the other narrative epi-
sodes within the terms of this new combinatory frame-
work. The first narrative gap illustrated in Fig. 3
pertains to Julia Dehning’s attempt to persuade her
father to let her marry Alfred Hersland. Mr Dehning
believes that ‘Facts can never tell anything truly
about another man’ and so Julia tries to persuade
him ‘by always repeating’ her argument (127).
This description could well serve as a key to reading
the first half of Making in which alternations between
telling(diegesis)andexplanation(exegesis)exposethe
tension between facts and our experience of them at
different points in time. The second large gap pictured
inFig.3(marked ‘2’) is thestoryofMrsShilling andher
daughters Sophie and Pauline. This story represents
the first narrative in the text about the less affluent
people with whom the Herslands live including the
families of their governesses, seamstresses, and ser-
vants in the surrounding Gossols (a fictional
Oakland, CA). Eventually, these ‘others’ have a greater
impact on David Hersland than his own parents, such
that a description of him is the description of many:
‘The youngest of the three Hersland children David
Hersland was so entirely of them’, the narrator
writes, ‘was so entirely of the being of all these children
that in the description of the being in him there will be
very much description of the being in many of them’
(1579).Therefore, while the firstgap(markingJulia’s
argument with her father) introduces the ontology
with which Stein struggles (whether facts are simply
just repeated experience), the narrative presented at
the second gap becomes significant in terms of the
larger textbecause it engages theepistemological ques-
tions with which Stein deals primarily in the second
half of the text—namely, how do we know if our
knowledge is whole or true?
One last example will serve to illustrate how read-
ing the text as a combinatory structure facilitates its
reading. In The Making of Americans both chapters 4
and 6 refer to Martha Hersland as ‘a whole one’
simply because Martha is physically discrete from
other human beings by the nature of having a skin
that makes her such. That is to say, Martha has no
internal definition based on a sense of self; she is,
quite simply, just not in some one else’s skin. The key
cluster25 that describes Martha is ‘a mushy mass of
independent dependent being with a skin holding it
together from flowing away’ (1533) in chapter 4
and in chapter 6, ‘one [who] by her skin cutting
her off from any other one . . . had attacking being
that never did more than just wobble in her’
(2157). Ultimately, Martha, who is ‘a whole one’
is ‘not any more, at all, interesting to the one know-
ing [her]’ (1527) and accordingly drops out of the
narrative. This very physical description of Martha’s
character (her individual nature is based on the
simple fact that it and not another ‘wobbles’ inside
her skin) is abrupt in the context of the much more
abstract character descriptions that refer to Redfern,
Julia, and Alfred. However, reading this description
in conversation with a similar key cluster in the first
chapter illuminates its portent. In the first chapter,
women who have heads that ‘look loose and wobbly
on them’ give the narrator a ‘queer’ or ‘uncertain
feeling’ (369). In particular, in the Shilling episode
(gap ‘B’, Fig. 4) the narrator explains that the Shilling
women are three ‘queer’ women whose ‘possible
queerness’ might really be the result of a physical
‘hole’. The narrator writes:
. . . they had lost something out of them
that should have been inside in them, that
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 375
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
something had dropped out of each one of
them and they had been indolent or stupid
or staring each one of them then and they
had not noticed such a dropping out of
them. Each one of them had perhaps a hole
then somewhere inside in them and this may
have been that which gave to each one of
them the queerness that it was never certain
was ever really there in any one of
them. (369)
One can easily draw a comparison between this
‘hole’ and the gaps in repetition that appear across
the first half of the text to conclude that the narrator
is alluding here to the fact that definition or onto-
logical knowledge may always be defined by a
‘lack’—that is, a generalized reckoning of a person
or thing will always be indeterminate or missing
some aspect.
It is also worth considering that ‘hole’ also calls
upon the concept of ‘whole’ knowledge or truth and
the epistemological questions to which Stein turns
her attention in the second half of the text. Thus,
Martha, who represents the successful skin, is ulti-
mately ‘a whole one’ and ‘not any more, at all,
interesting to the one knowing [her]’ and the
Shilling daughter who represents ‘the hole one’ is
finally ‘self-defensive’ with ‘no power’ and, likewise,
‘had no appeal to anyone who came near her
because they never could really come close to her,
she could not let them touch her lest they should
push a hole into her’ (394). Thus, neither the
‘whole’ knowledge nor the ‘hole’ knowledge are pri-
vileged. In addition, drawing a comparison between
the process of physical creation (the birth of a child
or ‘such a dropping out of them’) and knowledge
formation which are both necessarily dependent on
the holes, gaps, fissures, and ruptures upon which
these creations depend, leads the reader to consider
that the formation of knowledge is a cycle depen-
dent on the ongoing creation that results from this
push and pull, from the centrifugal force of the
center (the ‘hole’ in knowledge through which
one’s perceived sense of truth must drop out), and
the centripetal force of its outer edge (the ‘whole’
knowledge or the skin that struggles to keep that
idea of truth in).
Finally, how these more philosophical questions
relate to the structure may be read within the nar-
rator’s discussion of legitimacy and identity at the
beginning of David Hersland’s chapter, chapter 7.
‘I do ask some if they would mind it’, she says, ‘if
they had been born illegitimate’ (2441) for this
question of legitimate identity, she contends, pro-
vokes one to construct stories:
I am quite certain very many would not like to
have me ask it if they would like it, if they
would very much dislike it, if they would
make a tragedy of it, if they would make a
joke of it... I would like to know how everyone
can be feeling about such a thing, if they have
any feeling about any such thing. (2441)
Ultimately, she is saying that the drive to feel
wholeness and completeness (or truth and answers)
is the same drive that provokes us to create stories,
the tragedies, and comedies to which the narrator
alludes above. Just as certain is the fact that the
nature of stories (which can never be exact or real)
stimulates our need to identify the gaps, the absences,
or anything that proves that stories cannot define the
‘endless surprises’ that make us who we are.
Accordingly, in the first half of the text, the
narratives tell the progression of this family and its
history in a traditional, nineteenth century, realist
mode, while the repetitive sentences and para-
graphs serve as the more mimetic reminder of the
impossibility of exact replication. Figure 13 visualizes
this pattern in chapters 2, 4, and 5 which comprise
some of the major narratives in the first half of the
text (about Mary Maxworthing and Mabel Linker)
and in the center of the text (about Redfern’s
lover Cora Donour and the parabolic stories
about a girl named Edith and a boy who collected
butterflies). The lines in Fig. 13 represent some of
the pairings that exist between repeated structures.
By alternating the narrative and the repetitive
sections, the circular nature of the Hersland family
identity (in terms of its physical, familial inheri-
tance) and its history (in terms of its telling) is
emphasized in the first half of the text. Likewise,
the impending ‘whole understanding’ that is
implied by the end or ‘death’ of the text in the
second half generates the impetus to return to
T. E. Clement
376 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 13 Flow chart of two cycles of repetitive patterns, PowerPoint. (Colour image available as supplementary data in
Literary and Linguistic Computing online.)
Fig. 14 The circular nature of The Making of Americans.26 (Colour image available as supplementary data in Literary
and Linguistic Computing online.)
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 377
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
these narratives. After all, the narratives, though
‘hole-ridden’ have the effect of seeming understand-
able, of supplying a ‘whole’ understanding. Yet, in
returning to the narratives, the cycle begins again.
Consequently, the bicameral structure of the text
serves to signal relationships between the themes
that correspond across the two halves of the text
(illustrated in Fig. 14), making that repetition neces-
sary for the reader’s understanding.
According to this perspective, Stein’s ‘whole his-
tory’ is established by combining an ontological
consideration for what makes a history whole or
generalizable (by assigning categories, words, and
narratives to express what is indeterminate) in the
first half of the text and, in the second half of the
text, an epistemological consideration for how we
know it to be whole (by the act of questioning those
very assignations).
5 Conclusion
Ultimately, this circular form serves Stein’s purpose
to ‘make a complete history of everyone’ since ‘[a]
thing not beginning and not ending is certainly con-
tinuing’. She writes,
. . .one completely feeling something is one
not having begun to feel anything because to
have a beginning means that there will be
accumulation and then gradually dying away
as ending and this cannot be where a thing is a
complete thing (2395).
In this way, the form of the text justifies the per-
ception that there is no discernible starting or ending
point—no linear or hierarchical ‘accumulation and
dying away’—since each repetition has one or more
partners that participate in its meaning at any one
time. In addition, this history of ‘pairings’ (846)
adheres to Stein’s modernist ideal for creating a
‘complete’ thing in that it consistently points back
in on itself: ‘[O]rdinarily novels of the Nineteenth
Century live by association’; she writes ‘they are
wont to call up other pictures than the one they
present to you... While I was writing [The Making
of Americans] I didn’t want, when I used one word,
to make it carry with it too many associations’
(Stein, 1974, p. 493). Accordingly, distant reading
has shown us a guide to those relationships that
facilitate how to do a closer, combinatory reading.
Certainly ‘only reading’ The Making of Americans—
or reading it in a traditional way—appears to have
yielded limited material for scholarly work, but read-
ing the text differently, as an object of pairings or as
parts of combinations, ultimately works in contrast
to the supposition that the text is only meaningful to
the extent that it defeats making meaning. Finally,
a distant view of the text’s structure allows us to read
and better understand its repeating, to read the text
as an object that becomes, as it continues to turn in
on itself with a centrifugal force, a whole history
without beginning or ending—an alternative read-
ing, indeed.
Supplementary data
Colour images mentioned in the text are available
as supplementary data in Literary and Linguistic
Computing online.
References
Aiken, C. (1934, reprint 2000). We ask for bread.
In Curnutt, K. (ed.), The Critical Response to Gertrude
Stein. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, pp. 37–40.
Alter, R. (1990). The characteristics of ancient Hebrew
poetry. In The Literary Guide to the Bible. Cambridge,
Mass: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
pp. 611–24.
Berman, J. S. (2001). Modernist Fiction, Cosmopolitanism,
and the Politics of Community. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Bridgman, R. (1970). Gertrude Stein in Pieces. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Don, A., Zheleva, E., Gregory, M. et al. (2007).
Discovering Interesting Usage Patterns in Text
Collections: Integrating Text Mining with Visualization.
New York: ACM Press, pp. 213–22.
Douglas, M. (2007). Thinking in Circles: An Essay on Ring
Composition. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Dydo, U. (2003). Gertrude Stein: The Language That Rises,
1923-1934. Evanston, Ill: Northwestern University
Press.
T. E. Clement
378 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Gallup, D. (1973). The Making of The Making of
Americans. In Gallup, D. and Katz, L. (eds),
Fernhurst, Q.E.D., and Other Early Writings. New
York: Liveright, pp. 175–214.
James, W. (1912). A world of pure experience. In Essays
in Radical Empiricism. New York: Longman Green and
Co, pp. 39–91.
Katz, L. (1963). The First Making of The Making of
Americans. PhD Dissertation, Columbia University.
Levitt, M. (2001). Modernism bound. Journal of Modern
Literature, 24(3): 501–6.
Moore, G. (1998). Gertrude Stein’s The Making of
Americans: Repetition and the Emergence of
Modernism. New York: Peter Lang, pp. 99.
Moretti, F. (2000). Conjectures on world literature. New
Left Review, 1: 54–68.
Pei, J., Han, J., and Mao, R. (2000). CLOSET: An Efficient
Algorithm for Mining Frequent Closed Itemsets,
Proceedings of the 2000 International Workshop on
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery (DMKD’00),
Dallas, TX, May 2000.
"rhapsody, n." The Oxford English Dictionary (1989).
2nd edition. OED Online. Oxford University Press
http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/50205863 (accessed
7 July 2008).
Ruddick, L. (1990). Reading Gertrude Stein: Body, Text,
Gnosis. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Stein, G. (1925, reprint 1995). The Making of Americans:
Being a History of a Family’s. Normal, IL: Dalkey
Archive Press.
Stein, G. (1933, reprint 1995). The Autobiography of Alice
B. Toklas Vintage Books.
Stein, G. (1971, reprint 1990). Transatlantic interview
1946. In Scott, B. K. and Broe, M. L. (eds), The
Gender of Modernism. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, pp. 502–16.
Stein, G. (1974, reprint 1990). How writing is
written. In Scott and Broe (eds), The Gender of
Modernism. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
pp. 488–95.
Stein, G. (1975). The gradual making of The Making of
Americans. In Lectures in America. New York: Vintage
Books, pp. 270–86.
Taylor, M. (2003). A poetics of difference: the making of
Americans and unreadable subjects. NWSA Journal,
15(3): 26–42.
Wald, P. (1995). Constituting Americans: Cultural Anxiety
and Narrative Form. Durham: Duke University Press.
Walker, J. (1984). The Making of a Modernist: Gertrude
Stein from Three Lives to Tender Buttons. Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press.
Welch, J. W. and McKinlay, D. B. (1999). Chiasmus
Bibliography. Provo, Utah: Research Press.
Watten, B. (1998). An epic of subjectivation: The Making
of Americans. Modernism/Modernity, 5(2): 95–121.
Notes
1 In particular see Katz (1963), Bridgman (1970) and
Dydo (2003).
2 Some examples include Ruddick (1990); Watten
(1998); Berman’s chapter ‘Stein Topographies: The
Making of America’ (Berman, 2001); and Wald (1995).
3 The version of this text cited here is an electronic,
XML-encoded document derived from a PDF that
was based on the Dalkey Archive Press 1995 edition
of The Making of Americans, which is a copy of the
version Stein published in Paris with Contact Editions
in 1925. Throughout this article, references to the text
refer to paragraph numbers in the electronic edition
and are indicated using the paragraph () symbol. At
this time, the electronic version is not publicly
available.
4 The MONK project (http://www.monkproject.org/) is
a Mellon-funded collaborative including computing,
design, library science, and English departments at
multiple universities which is developing text mining
and visualization software in order to ‘explor[e] sig-
nificant patterns across large collections of full-text
humanities resources’ (‘Project Description’).
5 D2K was developed by Michael Welge’s team in the
Automated Learning Group (ALG) at the National
Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA)
at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC) http://www.alg.ncsa.uiuc.edu.
6 n-Grams may be thought of as a sequence of items of
‘n’ length, usually used as a basis for analysis in natural
language processing and genetic sequence analysis.
7 For more on the algorithm used please see Pei
et al. (2000).
8 For more information on FeatureLens, please see Don
et al. (2007). The list of participants and more about
this project is at http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/textvis/
featurelens/.
9 Each line in area C represents five paragraphs in order
that the user may see the whole text at once.
10 This data actually represents the compilation of two
lists of frequent patterns. One comprises the most
frequent singular words across the text. The other is
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 379
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a list of the most frequently co-occurring three-grams
across the text based on a dataset with a minimum
support of ten; thus, a three-gram must occur in at
least ten paragraphs for it to be included in the dataset.
11 The current iteration for The Making of Americans
is at http://monk.lis.uiuc.edu:6060/openlaszlo-3.3.
3-servlet/my-apps/featurelens-moa/src/featurelens.lzx.
12 Many of the figures in this article originally appeared
in color, an aspect of the visualizations that greatly
facilitates their usefulness and comprehensibility. For
full color figures, please see this article online.
13 The Hodder episode was first identified by Leon Katz
in ‘The first making of The Making of Americans’.
Other discussions of the episode are numerous.
In particular, see Moore (1998).
14 Spikes in the distribution are measured as follows: Let
F ¼ f1, f2, . . ., fn be one frequency values per section
for n sections for one word. Let M be the mean value
of f1 . . . fn. Let S be the value of the standard deviation
of f1 . . . fn. If one value of f1 . . . fn is above M þ S then
it is considered a spike. These distributions are then
ordered according to the value of the spike minus the
mean, from the biggest to the lowest.
15 In its current state, FeatureLens does not allow the user
to picture all of the patterns at once. Nonetheless, the
‘children’ pattern is a useful measurement for showing
the narrative alternations in chapters 1–5.
16 This evaluation is based on the 1995 Dalkey edition.
17 The first and second chapters remained untitled until
Stein published an abridged version of The Making of
Americans in 1934 with Harcourt, Brace. With the
abridged version, she titled the first chapter ‘The
Dehnings and the Herslands’ and the second chapter
‘Mrs. Hersland and the Hersland Children’.
18 This number refers to the sixteenth word (including
the title The Making of Americans) in the text
(‘through’) which begins the first repeated string
‘through his own’.
19 In coordination with Martin Mueller (a Monk colla-
borator in the English and Classics departments at
Northwestern University) who was interested in the
repetition in Homer, Craig Berry wrote the software
that was used to derive this data from the text. At the
time, Berry was working with NU’s Academic
Technologies—a unit within the Northwestern
University Library. They ultimately created the
‘Chicago Homer’ http://www.library.northwester-
n.edu/homer/, which produces the same kind of data
for the Iliad and Odyssey as well as for the poems of
Hesiod and the Homeric Hymns.
20 The data have been limited to strings that are three
tokens (excluding strings that contain function words
or punctuation) and greater (including strings that
contain function words and punctuation).
21 Structures, such as sentence and paragraph boundaries
are not ‘counted’ in this data—that is, the entire
text is treated as one long paragraph so that repeti-
tions that cross these boundaries are treated as match-
ing pairs.
22 Each of the seventeen base sentences in chapter 9
occurs twice except for two which are repeated three
times and two that are repeated outside that chapter in
chapter 8.
23 Jennifer Ashton does much to forward the argument
that The Making of Americans better represents a mod-
ernist than a postmodernis text for much the same
reason in her chapter ‘Gertrude Stein for Anyone’ in
From Modernism to Postmodernism (2005). She does
not, however, demonstrate that the structure of the
text’s parts also support this claim.
24 These terms—‘knowledge-about’ and ‘knowledge of
acquaintance’—were first explored in depth by
William James, Stein’s mentor at Harvard. In a 1904
essay entitled ‘A World of Pure Experience’,
James explores the relationship between the subject
and the object, ‘the knower and the known’ which
‘[t]hroughout the history of philosophy . . . have been
treated as absolutely discontinuous entities; and there-
upon the presence of the latter to the former, or
the apprehension by the former of the latter, has
assumed a paradoxical character which all sorts
of theories had to be invented to overcome’ (James,
1912, p. 52).
25 I use this term to denote key words or phrases which
occur infrequently in the text and serve to tie together
moments in the narrative that are otherwise seemingly
unrelated.
26 Using ring composition as a model, chapters 1, 5, and 9
have been positioned, respectively, as the introduction,
the turning point, and the latch according to the cri-
teria set forth in Mary Douglas’ book Thinking in
Circles: An Essay on Ring Composition (2007). Of the
two formal criteria I surveyed pertaining to chiastic
literary structures, I have chosen Douglas’s seven
conventions over Welch and McKinlay’s fifteen criteria
from their study Chiasmus Bibliography (Welch and
McKinlay,1999), which covers studies in chiasmus
across many literary genres and time periods. Douglas
maintains that her criteria were chosen as necessary
conventions that serve to mitigate the primary
T. E. Clement
380 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
technical problem of the ring composition (completing
the revolution) whereas Welch and McKinlay are inter-
ested in chiastic and parallel structures in general.
Since, I maintain that the successful construction of
a ring is a formal requirement that allows Stein to
accomplish her goals, Douglas’s criteria may serve as
evidence of its completion. In addition, Douglas out-
lines the history of a long-used literary form that
has fallen into disuse in contemporary society,
so much so that the first sure sign of a possible ring
form, she contends, is the confused reader. Other rele-
vant discussions of ring composition and chiasmic
structures can be found in Robert Alter’s essay
‘The Characteristics of Ancient Hebrew Poetry’
(Alter, 1987).
‘A thing not beginning and not ending’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 381
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
