
1 Introduction
In 1998, Forsyth coined the word ‘stylochronometry’
to define ‘stylometric studies dealing with chronol-
ogy attribution problems’ (R. S. Forsyth, 2004,
personal communication). The first recorded
attempt at stylochronometry relates to Campell’s
(1867) work on the Platonic corpus, after which
German researchers took over during the end of the
19th and the beginning of the 20th century.
Summaries of their work exist in Brandwood
(1990). Generally, those studies are characterized
by subjective selection of stylistic markers of often
low numbers and analyzed by descriptive statistics
leading to generalizations of doubtful accuracy.
Paired with insufficient external evidence to support
any assumptions, the true chronology of Plato’s
undated dialogues remains a problematic case and
probably will continue to remain.
However, recent, modern, and systematic
research on Plato and other cases has not been
hindered by such obstacles. This is due to the most
fascinating aspect of stylochronometry which is the
very same assumption it has been founded upon:
the hypothesis that certain aspects of an author’s
writing style evolve rectilinearly over the course of
an author’s life time, hence, with appropriate
methods and stylistic markers, such changes ought
to be detectable (Frischer, 1991). This assumption
has resulted in a number of successful studies which
have primarily concentrated on the more straight-
forward subject of detection of stylistic develop-
ment, taking for granted that general stylistic
development not only exists, but is additionally
detectable. Such studies operate as text classification
for a limited number of age/year categories prin-
cipally for the purposes of description. Notably,
however, the path has not been as promising for the
remaining stylochronometric branches, detection of
chronological order and relative dating. Although
these branches have actually taken the main
assumption a step further—that is, if development
does exist and is detectable based on internal textual
evidence, then it ought to be traceable in a manner
resulting into a correct chronological order of the
ordinal kind for the documents under investigation,
or even the acquisition of relative dates based on
date of composition by treating date as an interval
variable—their lack of universal credibility stems
from the ambitious studies that have been
Correspondence:
Constantina Stamou,
Ricability, 30 Angel Gate,
City Rd, London,
EC1V 2PT, UK.
E-mail: cstamou@gmail.com
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
181
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm029 Advance Access Published on 1 October 2007
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
undertaken. That is, so far the main problems of
interest have been works for which sufficient external
evidence does not exist, such as Plato’s dialogues, but
also Shakespeare’s plays, Horace’s Ars Poetica, and
Euripides’ tragedies. Consequently, any conclusions
drawn have been impossible to verify.
Furthermore, it appears that a number of devel-
opmental studies share similar characteristics by
having been performed on known authors, either by
external evidence or by literary criticism, for their
identifiable stylistic trends beforehand (Jaynes, 1980;
Opas, 1996; Can and Patton, 2004); therefore, it has
been simple, first, to detect developmental patterns,
and second to fall back on literary criticism to
reinforce observations, dispute literary criticism
(Jaynes, 1980), and link any findings to external
evidence. However, literary criticism is based on
subjective opinion and interpretation. Moreover,
such studies have given birth to the implied general-
ization that some aspect of stylistic development
ought to be universal and may be traceable in the
wider authorial population, just as stylistic stability
is considered universal and detectable in certain
aspects. However, the tailored-to-each-author
manner in which stylochronometric studies have
been conducted until recently does not permit
speculation on the existing universal applicable and
inapplicable side of the rectilinearity hypothesis,
which is reinforced by the limited number of studies
reporting results highlighting stability instead of
development (Jaynes, 1980; Laffal, 1995; Whissell,
1999; Smith and Kelly, 2002).
To answer questions of the kind ‘is it feasible to
identify and efficiently use universal stylochro-
nometers?’ and ‘is there application for the rectilin-
earity hypothesis in the stylistics domain?’, it is
believed to be important to primarily investigate
past studies in all three stylochronometric branches
(nominal, ordinal, and interval) to obtain an
overview of the stylochronometric domain. Such
an investigation ought to shed light on common
problems and provide insight for improved
strategies.
Consequently, the purpose of this article is to offer
a broad perspective of the field by the exposition
of cases on which a breadth of methodologies,
approaches, stylistic markers, and text sizes have
been adopted. The aim is to provide an overall
account of the situations researchers face and to
determine the nature of any common problems that
have arisen by describing the most notable modern
representative studies characterized mainly by the
use of computer-based methods which have in recent
years promoted the acquisition of vast amounts
of machine-readable literary material, the straight-
forward and time-efficient application of both
univariate and multivariate statistical methods, and
the development of ‘new concepts of textual analysis
such as vocabulary distributions, word frequencies,
etc.’ (Temple, 1996). The second aim is to identify
common variable types that have been employed
across the selected stylochronometric studies to
compile a list of chronometers of potentially
universal use.
2 Stylistic Development over Time
Whissell (1996) notes that ‘development comes
into question when works of a single author or in a
single category are spread across a considerable span
of time, during which they might have been expected
to change’. Although the studies described adopt a
loose interpretation of the phrase ‘considerable span
of time’ [ranging from the Beatles’s (Whissell, 1996)
eight-year career to Yeats’s fifty-eight year poetic
career (Jaynes, 1980)], they do successfully report
stylistic development in the authorial works
investigated.
The first study of interest is attributed to Jaynes
(1980) who concentrated on the syntactical aspects of
Yeats’s poetry due to literary criticism focusing on
radical systematic and unsystematic stylistic and
semantic differences between Yeats’s early and late
work. Jaynes computer-analyzed twenty-five typical
Yeatsean poems published in two year intervals—
ranging from 87 to 319 words totalling 4,656
words—from eleven poetry volumes representing
Yeats’s poetic career from 1889 to 1939. The results
were analyzed using t-tests, Pearson correlation
coefficients between word-class and function
raw scores to detect linear relationships, Spearman
correlation coefficients between word-class and
function ratio categories to detect nonlinear
C. Stamou
182 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
relationships and linear trends in the raw scores, as
well as time-cluster analysis. Fifteen variables1 were
selected and used with time-cluster analysis, but the
obtained results, although significant changes were
detected in nouns as heads, prepositions/nouns ratio,
main verbs as heads, auxiliary verb heads, and pre-
positional phrases words, produced nonlinear
patterns from which it was difficult to generalize
across the entire Yeatsean sample. Consequently,
Jaynes concluded that Yeats’s syntactic style
remained stable during his poetic career, which was
contrary to critical opinion or Yeats’s personal
remarks.
Turning to a different set of variables derived
from diction,2 and again drawing upon critical
observations on thematic shifts, Jaynes concluded
that, based on t-tests, Yeats’s poetry is characterized
by ‘an early Celtic period composed of words of
moderate length and proportion of content words,
followed by a more personal, informal period of
longer words but fewer content words, and finally a
homogeneous period of much shorter words, and
with a higher percentage of content words’.
In 1996, Opas produced a multivariate and
multi-dimensional analysis of Beckett’s prose texts
with the assistance of Biber’s (1988) model.3
Of primary interest was to detect Beckett’s stylistic
development over time. To test her assumptions,
Opas selected eleven Beckett plays in 1,000 word
blocks comprising around 37,000 words in total,
approximately one work per decade, and covering
the period between 1938 and 1982. Then, Opas used
Biber’s software to obtain standardized frequency
counts of the variables required by the model and
submitted them to factor analysis in order to
examine the behaviour of the mean scores of the
texts along the model’s dimensions.
By comparing Beckett’s works to the standard-
ized genre-specific norms provided by Biber, Opas
was able to identify the extent to which Beckett’s
texts are typical narratives rather than highly
individualistic. In the first two model dimensions
(involved versus informational production and nar-
rative versus non-narrative concerns) the Beckett
texts have general fiction characteristics, however,
on the remaining three dimensions examined
(explicit versus situation-dependent reference,
overt expression of persuasion, and abstract versus
nonabstract information) the scores suggest that
often some of Beckett’s texts appear more explicit,
more situation-dependent, and more abstract com-
pared to readers’ expectations of narrative fiction
since the scores are situated beyond the fictional
dimension range provided by the Biber model.4
Consequently, Opas concluded that although
Beckett’s writing style evolved during his lifetime
from the more typical narrative productions to his
individualistic type of expression, his change has not
been uniform. Each work appears to be stylistically
innovative, which is confirmed by lack of consistent
trends in any of the dimensions tested, and also by
literary criticism in accordance with Opas’s results.
Whissell (1996) assessed the extent to which Paul
McCartney and John Lennon differed in their lyrics
during the years 1962–70 by using emotional
stylometry5 with content analysis of the emotion-
ality6 of words in terms of pleasantness and
activation. Based on the assumption that pleasant-
ness, activation, and cheerfulness would have
decreased over the Beatles’ career in four life stages,
Whissell automatically scored 155 Beatles songs with
the Dictionary of Affect (Whissell et al., 1986) to
obtain percentage usage of the emotional and
stylometric categories comparable for the two
composers. The aim was to both identify whether
such a transition existed and to locate the stage at
which the change occurred. Chi-square assessed
differences between lyricists and career stages, the
Kruskal–Wallis test of medians compared the
median of word lengths across the four stages, and
the Mantel-Haezel test for linear association exam-
ined the possible existence of linearity between
variables across the different life stages under the
assumption that any linearity identified evolved
gradually, be that positive or negative.
Results indicated that during the two middle
musical stages words were relatively longer than those
in the remaining stages; that pleasantness, activation,
and cheerfulness diminished in strength, while
nastiness came in force along with softness; that
sadness followed a rise-then-fall-then-rise path; and
that words like ‘the, a, an’, and whoops, repetition,
and punctuation became more common, whereas
first and second pronouns, negatives, ‘and’, ‘love’,
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 183
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and ‘girl’ were found to diminish. Whissell’s results
agree with critics’ observations on the Beatles’s lyrics
according to whom Lennon is ‘the less pleasant
and the sadder lyricist’, whereas the lyrics written by
both song-writers are most noticeably negatively
affected by Lennon’s mood in the first and second
stages of their career by being ‘less pleasant, less
active, and less cheerful over time’ (Whissell, 1996).
Finally, observation of variables’ trends’ percentage
rates for the different stages revealed that the greatest
change for pleasant words and emotionality reduc-
tion occurred between the first two stages by noting
rarer instances, whereas softness and nastiness rose
between stages three and four.
The most recent developmental stylochrono-
metric study is attributed to Can and Patton (2004)
whose work concentrated on detecting changes in the
writing style of two Turkish authors, C¸etin Altan and
Yas ar Kemal. Can and Patton examined type and
token length, and the frequency of most common
words using ANOVA, linear regression, logistic
regression, principal components analysis, and step-
wise discriminant analysis. They also used sixteen
fixed-size blocks of 2,500 words each for each old and
new period reaching a total of 80,000 words of
journalistic columns by Altan published during
1960–69 and 2000, and similar size blocks by
Kemal obtained from his 1971 and 1998 novels in
their entirety. Their aim was to detect a marked
positive change between the sampled early and late
works as expressed in terms of the stylistic markers.
ANOVA showed that for each author the average
token and type length were significantly longer for
the new works. Linear regression on Altan’s data for
token lengths and text age was successful, although
not highly impressive (R2¼ 0.2415) suggesting that
other factors must also be involved. Logistic reg-
ression on the usage rates of types and tokens, with
binary dependent variable values ‘new’ and ‘old’ and
frequencies of tokens or types of a particular length
as the independent variable, showed that, for both
tokens and types, word length of three to eight was
predominately occurring in the old works, whereas
word length of nine or greater was characteristic
of the new works with significant results for words
greater than ten characters. For Kemal, word length
between three and six for tokens, five or less for
types, and sixteen for both types and tokens was
detected as a characteristic of the old work, whereas
types of length between three and twelve and tokens
of size two, ten, and twelve were abundant in the
new work. It was concluded that such change may
be attributed to the authors’ progressive mastery of
language hence the use of longer words which the
agglutinative nature of Turkish allows.
Comparison of the frequencies of the fourteen
most common words for Altan with logistic regres-
sion yielded five words as significant out of which
two (bu, gibi) were more frequent in the old texts and
the remaining three (c¸ok, da, de) in the new texts.
From the fifteen most common words used for
Kemal, two (dedi, gibi) were found significantly more
often in the old blocks and two (daha, kadar) in the
new. Principal components analysis with all the
variables in was conducted to provide graphical
illustrations for the separation between the works.
Finally, stepwise discriminant analysis with cross-
validation chose the most efficient chronometers.
The different discriminant analyses run for Altan
produced the best token length selected ranging
between four and eighteen characters, the best type
length between three and fifteen characters, and the
best common words among the selected fourteen
which were da, de, c¸ok, bu, ic¸in, and sonra. Average
success classification rate was 98.96%. Kemal’s
discriminant analyses produced type length frequen-
cies ranging from two to eighteen, character-length
of four for tokens, and the words dedi, kadar, da,
sonra, ne, and daha among the most common fifteen.
Kemal’s average success classification rate was
84.38%. The difference in the two classification
rates was thought due to the greater time distance
between Altan’s works, hence allowing for more
opportunity for his writing style to evolve.
3 Order of Composition
Studies on developmental work have presented
evidence in favour of detectable and identifiable
developmental stylistic trends. Relying on such
findings then, order of composition ought to addi-
tionally be measurable. Admittedly, though, many
more parameters need to be taken into account in
such cases, and different versions of developmental
C. Stamou
184 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
order are in theory plausible based on the accuracy
of the available data and results. Theoretically,
literary criticism and historical evidence can rein-
force or refute claims of chronological ordering.
However, at least in particular cases such as the
Classics, and Shakespeare in which historical
evidence does not suffice, it has still not been
possible to reach definite conclusions.
3.1 Plato
Known as the author of the Republic and the Apology,
Plato left a stylistic and thematically variable work
which was presumably composed over a long period
of time allowing for the development of his thought
and philosophical theory. Problems with authenti-
city relate to Epistle 7 and other dialogues due
to comparisons and disagreement on what the
content of his philosophical theory should be,
however, the problem with the ordering of the
Platonic corpus has been active since antiquity.
Scholars relying on biographical and historical
material have been able to identify three stylistic
periods (early, middle, late) in Plato’s writings to
which dialogues have been categorized accordingly.
Unfortunately, however, the order of the dialogues
within each stylistic period has not been possible
to ascertain, especially the late dialogues which show
unexpected variability in terms of style (Ledger,
1989). In particular, although scholars generally
accept the Laws as the last Platonic work, preceded
by the Timaeus, the Critias, and the Republic, ‘before
them in reverse order of composition, according
to the majority view, came the Philebus, Phaedo,
Symposium, Politicus, Sophist, Parmenides, and
Theaetetus’, while there is no agreement con-
cerning the remaining works (Brandwood, 1990).
Furthermore, as Brandwood (1990) mentions, ‘the
greater consensus which exists today about the
chronological sequence itself considerably different
from that just mentioned can rightly be claimed
as the achievement of the stylistic method’.
Speculations center around Plato’s ability later in
life to use a plethora of styles or to editorial and
secretarial influences on the late dialogues. Thesleff
(1967) attributes any possible failure to obtain an
accurate order for Plato’s dialogues to lack of a linear
development in Plato’s corpus in the first place since
his diction may well had been altered deliberately
from dialogue to dialogue to suit Plato’s purposes.
Therefore, the order that would have to be detected
may as well obey a different type of curve.
Cox and Brandwood (1959) investigated the
distribution of clausulae in the entirety of Plato’s
late dialogues by measuring only the last five syllables
of each sentence in the texts and categorizing the
syllables either as long or short, based on the
assumption that Plato’s late style changed rectilin-
early. The frequency distributions of the resulting
thirty-two qualitatively different sentence-ending
types revealed a ‘marked difference’ between the
percentages for the Republic and for the Laws.
The aim of the study was to obtain a decreasing
order of composition for the remaining plays with
affinity to the Republic, based on the assumption that
Plato’s writing style changed linearly with time.
Linear discriminant analysis was the method used
to score each different type of sentence ending
which were subsequently assessed for significance.
A negative mean score was assigned to the Republic
and a positive mean score to the Laws. It was
anticipated that the remaining plays’ scores would
provide a suggestive ordering, which was eventually
the following: Republic, Timaeus, Critias, Politicus,
Philebus, and Laws. Critias was the only play of
ambiguous dating since based on the statistical
evidence it could have also been placed anywhere
before Timaeus or anywhere before Politicus. The
researchers acknowledged that such an ordering
would not be in complete accordance with views on
Platonic chronology at the time, although there was a
minority group sharing similar positions.
Wishart and Leach (1970) extended Cox and
Brandwood’s work by investigating the behaviour of
percentages of five-syllable sequences as in 1–5, 2–6,
3–7, etc. up to N-4 throughout the text instead of at
the end of a sentence, using cluster analysis, princi-
pal components analysis, and multidimensional
scaling. The data in thirty-three samples ranging
between 1880 and 3667 numbers of syllable groups
which had been derived from the ten Platonic
books Timaeus, Sophistes, Philebus, Critias, Laws,
Seventh Epistle, Republic, Phaedrus, Politicus, and
Symposium, were first considered individually and
then concatenated into the original ten books to
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 185
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
obtain accurate representations. All the books,
except Phaedrus, Symposium, and the Seventh
Epistle, represent the late group used by Cox and
Brandwood (1959). Moreover, only continuous
prose was used, unlike Cox and Brandwood.
Euclidean distance measured resemblance between
samples. In reality, the researchers concentrated on
computing the sum of the squared error for each pair
of samples based on the selected variables and used
the values to form clusters by adding cases to a
group-sample in succession whose Euclidean dis-
tance from the group average was minimum.
It was noted that the obtained chronological
order for the late group of writings was the same for
the one produced by Ward’s method, Cox and
Brandwood, and multidimensional scaling, since for
Plato to maintain his theory of rhythm and use of
clausulae, experimentation, development, and adap-
tation of rhythmic variation was expected to be
reflected throughout his prose. The suggested seria-
tion was Phaedrus-Republic-Symposium, Timaeus,
Sophistes, Critias (Seventh Epistle, Politicus),
Philebus, and Laws, with the Seventh Epistle and
Politicus being the only dialogues deviating from the
ordering, and the Republic and the Symposium were
noted to occupy the same position although not in
any specific order. The Phaedrus data did not
produce any evidence of a homogeneous late book,
but rather placed it ‘controversially’ (Robinson,
1992) directly opposite to the Laws which is uni-
versally considered to be the latest (Wishart and
Leach, 1970). However, Keyser (1992) expressed
doubts about the obtained results since considerable
variation remained unaccounted for which placed
great demands on the data for production of the
principal components and multidimensional scaling
plots. Moreover, Brandwood (1990) has also criti-
cized their work by noticing that the five samples
used from Phaedrus were taken from speech parts,
thus biasing the results.
Ledger (1989) stylometrically analyzed, with
the help of the Greek alphabet,7 carefully-selected
1,000 word blocks (total 702) from all of Plato’s
works to obtain the order of composition of Plato’s
dialogues. The methods employed were canonical
discriminant analysis and stepwise discriminant
analysis. Ledger constructed four matrices which
he populated with the dialogues based on cross-
referencing from within the dialogues themselves.
The categories consisted of overlapping sets of
dialogues, ranging from having one dialogue in each
early and late category, to having thirteen in the
early one including the Republic and four to the late
one including the Laws. Stepwise discriminant
analysis was used in order to select a subset of
maximum six variables able to discriminate between
the groups of early and late dialogues and that subset
was subsequently used with canonical discriminant
analysis to obtain a unique combination of the
original variables that would maximally correlate
with group membership and order each work
according to canonical variate’s value. In particular,
canonical discriminant analysis was first used with
the first ten variables, then, with the best nine and so
on until the best three are used. After, the procedure
was run with all thirty-seven variables in the model
with each variable set (ALETS, BLETS, CLETS)
separately. Mahalanobis distance was employed to
examine distance between different dialogues.
Ledger agrees with current scholarship in the
existence of two periods of early and late dialogues.
Within those periods he places the Seventh Epistle
and Epinomis with affinity to the Laws, and Hippias
Major and Alcibiades 1 with affinity to the Republic,
whereas the order obtained for the later works
was Sophist-Politicus, Laws-Epinomis, and Timaeus-
Critias. Furthermore, in this order, Philebus is con-
troversially placed very early, and Timaeus appears
very late. The placing of the last pair of dialogues,
however, is in disagreement with that of Cox and
Brandwood (1959) and Wishart and Leach (1970)
who place it at the beginning of the late period.
Problems related to Ledger’s method relate to
disputed authenticity of some of the plays.
The last stylochronometric attempt on Plato
is attributed to Temple (1996) who examined
thirty-eight linguistic, thirty-two clausular, seven-
teen reply, hiatus, and thirty-seven orthographic
variables from past research in twenty-five platonic
dialogues with the help of principal components
analysis and MST (Minimum Spanning Tree)8 as an
attempt to rework the ‘old’ stylometry. Temple first
aimed at dimensionality reduction with principal
components analysis on the general linguistic,
C. Stamou
186 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
clausular, and reply data, while subsequently
he used a total of six variables selected from the
hiatus and orthographic9 variable types, as well as
the first and second principal components for the
linguistic and clausular data obtained from his first
experiment in a final principal components analysis
in order to work with reduced noise.
Separate principal components analyses on the
linguistic and clausular variables indicated similar-
ities in the dispersion of points, that is, early and
middle dialogues appear to be easily distinguishable
from the late dialogues, although the late dialogues
were characterized by greater variability. They
also seemed to be associated with an increase in
frequency of linguistic variables, superlatives, rhetor-
ical questions, the words ‘orthos/orthotata’, reduc-
tion of the words ‘pane je’ and clausular patterns.
A similar trend was observed for the reply variables.
In the second phase, the ten selected variables
produced relatively similar results to those obtained
from the analysis on the linguistic variables. The early
and middle dialogues revealed a clear separation
from the late ones which were found a lot more
dispersed compared with the tight gathering of both
early and middle dialogues, with the Parmenides and
the Theaetetus being placed to the middle period,
whereas the Sophist, Timaeus, and Critias to the
beginning of the late one. The discrimination was
based on a decrease in hiatus, changes in orthography
and the first clausular and linguistic principal
components from the first analysis, and was justified
either as a nonmonotonical stylistic change in Plato’s
writing or influences from secretaries or editors who
affected the dialogues. Furthermore, the Meno,
contrary to popular theory who places it later than
the Gorgias as a transitional work, was in this case
been placed early; also, the Euthyphro was placed
relatively late although generally it is believed to be
early; finally, the first book of the Republic group was
found clearly to precede the remaining ones. On the
whole, however, subdivision of early and late
dialogues was observed to agree with current views.
3.2 Other studies
In 1982, by attempting to obtain the order of
composition of Marlowe’s plays, Ule used nine10
variable types on the assumption that works
composed sequentially entertain a particular affinity
related to the variables measured. Affinity was
measured with Euclidean distance11 between pairs
of distribution curves, whereas RVO was used for
vocabulary overlap. To obtain possible sequences of
composition, Ule computationally generated all
possible sequences of the seven plays. Ule observed
that all the obtained sequences agreed in placing
the Tamburlaine first, whereas in three sequences,
based on word length, connectives, and RVO, the
second part of the play accurately followed the first.
However, as Ule (1982) notes, such a procedure will
not be effective in more populated corpora due to
restricted required machine time and resources
available in one’s lifetime.
Burrows (1987), using most common word
frequencies without distinction in grammatical or
lexical function, developed a method which identi-
fies similarities and differences across a range of
texts and text types by obtaining frequency profiles
and correlating them with each other in descending
order of frequency in order to map them using
Eigen analysis. By comparison of several different
parameters, Burrows identified authorial and
chronological determinants. His method was
tested on Jane Austen’s published narrative using
thirty most common words.
Initially, similar frequency patterns were
obtained across different types of narratives (pure,
character, dialogue) in the Austen texts. When
eighteen words were tested after removal of those
ones which changed form in the narratives, Pearson
correlation coefficients indicated consistency in the
frequency profiles. Subsequently, Eigen analysis
graphs revealed among other things that each narra-
tive corresponded almost perfectly to its assigned
date of composition. The results remained of similar
quality when all thirty words were used, and again
when major homographic forms had been clearly
defined and incorporated in the hierarchy of the
frequency profiles.
Burrows also converted pure narrative into 2,000
word segments and obtained word frequencies in
order to compare them with each other or with the
corresponding segments from a different type of
narrative, partly concentrating on the demonstra-
tion of differences between Austen’s early and latest
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 187
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
narratives. Burrows noted the ability of the method
to successfully distinguish between an author’s
different writing stages, simultaneously mentioning
that the correct chronological sequence was dis-
rupted only when Austen’s last novels and the
fragmented manuscript ‘Sanditon’, completed by an
anonymous author after Austen’s death, entered the
data set. Moreover, it was observed that although
the original ‘Sanditon’ appeared close to the early
parts of Persuasion, the imitation part overlapped
only slightly which could not be nevertheless
‘mistaken for the original’.
Arguably, Horace’s Ars Poetica has been deemed
his hardest poem to date due to variation in the
proposed assigned chronology and to lack of appro-
priate historical information to accurately date the
remaining of his output as a reference point.
Consequently, only relative chronology, although
well established based on external evidence, is
available. So far, various attempts at the task had
relied either on placing the poem according to
Horace’s estimated developmental pattern of poetic
ideas, or according to the life span of the historical
figures mentioned in it, or on stylometric material of
diction and meter (Duckworth, 1965). In 1991, after
refuting Duckworth’s results and showing that no
connection exists between meter and chronology,
Frischer (1991) set out to date the poem aiming at
linking it to Epistles I instead of Epistles II1 as had
been traditionally the case up to that date.
Accepting the relative chronology of Horace’s
canon, and after controlling for genre and meter by
separating the poems in lyrical and hexameters,
Frischer performed three experiments. In his first
experiment, poems were treated as nominal vari-
ables to establish the assumption that poems found
in clusters (early, early-middle, middle, middle-late,
and late) did so because they had been composed
during the same time period. Using the chi-square
test to investigate the chronological association
between four selected function words12 and the
poems13, Frischer developed models by combining
Ars Poetica with any other poem according to genre
and time restrictions and by assuming closeness of
composition based on time periods. The best model
incorporated Satires II, Epistles I, and Epistles II.2,
whereas models which combined Ars Poetica with
Epistles II.2 were also satisfactory.14 Because Epistles
II.2 was treated as a late hexameter poem, this
placed the Ars Poetica in the middle period
(Frischer, 1991).
In his second experiment, Frischer investigated
‘macrochronometers’ to detect universal stylistic
development and strengthen the results of the first
experiment. Mean word-length was found steady,
whereas mean sentence-length in words as per
strong stop fluctuated randomly; therefore, they
were omitted from the analysis. Unique strings as a
percentage of all strings showed that the variables
poem and string-type (unique versus nonunique)
are not independent, while graphical representation
revealed a positive linear pattern. However, no
reduced model performed better than the original
full model, which suggested that there is ‘no basis at
this point in the analysis for associating the Ars
Poetica with one of the datable hexameter poems’
(Frischer, 1991).
In the final experiment, the hexameter and lyric
poems were separately treated as interval variables
by being assigned their relative year of composition
in order to assign a precise date to Ars Poetica. Using
only the ratio of unique strings, an R2 derived from
linear regression and equal to 99.1% was obtained
for the lyrical poems, although the number of cases
in the sample was only three. In the hexameter
poems, R2 was 69.6% for a total number of five
cases, and the obtained graph revealed a more
scattered picture. The hexameters’ formula placed
Ars Poetica around 20/21 B.C. Then, Frischer used
the four function words with the Ars Poetica only in
order to obtain most and least probable dates by
running the regression method seventeen times
with a variable Ars-Poetica date from 24 to 8 B.C.,
controlling simultaneously for the remaining
poems. Frischer wanted to obtain the most and
least plausible years of composition for the poem
based on R2, to circumvent the small sample sizes,
and to ‘increase the plausibility, if not probability,
of [the] results by including the Ars Poetica in
the analysis’ (Frischer, 1991). The results showed a
superior R2 from the three function words sed, per,
and nec, compared to the one from the unique
strings, while ad produces a similar value. The ratio
of the best to the worst R2, ‘which quantifies the
C. Stamou
188 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
advantage of the best model over the worse’, reveals
that ‘sed and per are very reliable chronometers
indeed, both in absolute and relative terms’ and that
the best suggestible date is between 24 and 20 B.C.
(Frischer, 1991).
4 Relative Date
Studies concentrating purely on relative dating are
not as simple or as straightforward to conduct, even
more so compared to studies dealing solely with
order of composition since much more precision is
needed in the obtained results; therefore, merely
correct chronological order in this case does not
suffice.
4.1 Euripides
Only a handful of Euripides’s tragedies, out of
almost ninety plays, have been securely dated
based on external evidence. Part of the remaining
ones have been approximately dated according to
internal evidence derived from meter. Eighteen of
his plays are extant, while fragments of some of the
plays, often substantial, survive.
In 1981, Devine and Stephens investigated
occurrences of appositives at Porson’s bridge15 in
the trimeter parts of Euripides’ plays due to obser-
vations placing higher concentrations of the stylistic
marker in the later plays. The aim was to assign an
accurate chronology to the texts and introduce evi-
dence of the strong correlation between the appos-
itives at Porson’s bridge and resolution instances on
which most work up to that date had concentrated.
The selected measurements were rates per thousand
trimeters and standard deviation of appositives at
Porson’s bridge, and rates per thousand trimeters
and tetrameters of resolution with their respective
confidence intervals which were used to establish a
rank order of the plays.
To provide dates to the undated plays, linear
regression was used on the well-dated texts Medea,
Hippolytus, Troades, Helen, Orestes, and Iphigeneia
at Aulis, with the exception of the Alcestis and the
Bacchae because of their systematic deviation from
the true chronology during the ranking phase. It was
noted that the rate of appositives at Porson’s bridge
resulted in 91% variance accounted for, that the
same percentage of correct prediction results with
the rate of resolution in the trimeter sections, and
that 97% variance accounted for can be achieved by
the rate of resolution in the tetrameter sections.
Following, the formulae were used to obtain pre-
dicted dates for the disputed plays. It was observed
that Heracleidae was dated later than Hippolytus;
Hecuba was dated late; Supplices was dated at 423
B.C. although such a date disagrees with that
assigned to Andromache with which it ought to be
in the same group; appositives dated the Electra at
414 B.C.; Helen was dated the same by all criteria;
tetrameters are the only ones to correctly date the
Phoenissae later than the Helen; and on the whole the
resulting model dates were very close to the actual
known chronology (Devine and Stephens, 1981).
A number of minor resolution criteria were
further examined to acquire additional indepen-
dent but not duplicate information regarding the
dating since all resolution types appear to increase
over time. Besides significant variation from the
restricted number of minor resolution occurrences,
the overall obtained ranking agreement was found
strong and statistically significant. Moreover, when
the minor resolution ranking was correlated with
the ranking of the dated plays obtained by the
regression analysis, a significant correlation coeffi-
cient was obtained. When the actual dating was
examined, the Phoenissae was wrongly dated before
the Helen, and the Bacchae before the Orestes,
whereas the Alcestis was placed after the Ion and the
Andromache just before the Helen (Devine and
Stephens, 1981).
Finally, the rate of resolution and appositives
at Porson’s bridge were predicted by the dates of
the plays in order to examine the growth of the
chronometers. A satisfactory goodness-of-fit was
obtained, although the placing of the Bacchae and
the Alcestis was characterized as ‘anomalous’, the
justification being difference in genre since Alcestis
is a pro-satyr play, whereas the Bacchae was pro-
bably affected by stylistic aspects of its language.
Cropp and Fick (1985) concentrated on occur-
rences of resolution in iambic trimeters of the
dialogue scenes in Euripides’ tragedies and their
relation to the tragedies’ chronology. Incidences of
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 189
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
‘low resolution-rates and a restricted variety of
resolution-types in the early dated extant trage-
dies—Alcestis, Medea, Hippolytus—and of increas-
ingly higher rates and an increasingly wider variety of
types in the later ones—Troades, Helen, Phoenissae,
Orestes, Bacchae, Iphigeneia at Aulis’ had been
observed, interpreted as reflecting ‘on the whole, a
development over time in this feature of his style,
rather than some chance combination of special
motivations relevant to each individual play’ (Cropp
and Fick, 1985). Drawing from such observations,
and from the assumption that plays were expected to
show variation in their relative rates of resolution in
accordance to a developmental time-line, regression
analysis was utilized on data both from the frag-
mented and the fully-dated tragedies aiming to apply
the obtained model on the undated extant and
undated fragmentary plays. Therefore, data asso-
ciated with particular years formed subsets for which
each resolution rate was considered the best estimate
of the year-subset. Noticeably, the later the year, the
higher the resolution rate tended to be, although
such a straightforward increase was not observed
until the year 431 to 406.16 Relative likelihood inter-
vals were also established for the variable of interest.
It was finally observed that, for the eleven undated
plays, Danae, Kretes, and Protesilaos were associated
with the early group, whereas Temenidai (with
plausible date 422>), Polyidos (421>), Antigone
(420>), Oidipus (419>), Meleagros (418>), and
Auge (414>) were associated with the late group.
Phaethon was located between 427 and 414, while
Alkmene was associated with the 420–410 decade. In
addition, conflict between the resolution evidence
and external evidence resulted in doubts about the
established dates of Erechtheus and Antiope. On the
whole, it was concluded that ‘absence of conflict
between the metrical and the nonmetrical evidence
which tends to reinforce confidence in the validity of
the metrical evidence as a whole, and in correcting if
only with negative effect in some cases many of the
inferences made in the past from the evidence of
resolutions’ (Cropp and Fick, 1985).
4.2 Shakespeare
The problem of dating Shakespeare’s plays stems
from the fact that ‘Shakespeare did not personally
oversee the publication of a collected edition of his
words, and no autograph manuscripts survive
of words attributed to him in his lifetime. The
contents and chronology of his canon—. . . there-
fore remain, and will for ever remain, a matter of
dispute’ (Wells et al., 1987). In particular, disputes
are currently centering around three major areas:
the relative order of the early comedies, the link
between literary composition in varying genres, and
the actual date Shakespeare began composing his
plays. His poetry is well established chronologically
though in his early work, therefore, it is of interest
to detect possible links between the vocabulary
of the early plays with that of the poems (Wells et al.,
1987). Jackson (2002) summarizes Shakespeare’s
poetic development in terms of meter as being
away from a succession of strictly iambic, decasyl-
labic, end-stopped lines towards greater freedom,
variety, and flow. The use of enjambment increased,
the sense being run on, with no syntactical break,
from the end of one line to the beginning of the next.
More alexandrines appeared, and the verse began to
carry a larger proportion of extra unstressed syllables,
particularly those constituting feminine or double
endings to a line, the final iambic foot being followed
by an unstressed syllable. As end-of-line pauses
became less frequent, pauses within the line became
more frequent and heavier, and were more variously
placed. Pentameters shared by two or more speakers
became increasingly common.
To determine and assess the predictive accuracy
of a number of lexical, metrical, and structural
variables, Brainerd (1980) examined correlations
with date of composition of Shakespearean plays
with the intention of employing the best discrim-
inator variables on the plays of disputed dates. The
central aim was to observe, or not, deviations from
the disputed dates given to several Shakespearean
plays (Evans et al., 1974). The selected variables
included average verse line length in words, percen-
tage of split lines,17 percentage of contractions
involving pronominal forms, and relative frequencies
per hundred of 120 most frequent—or words in
connection to high-frequency—lemmata on which
no distinction of grammatical categories was made.
Brainerd initially identified the most sensitive
discriminators by visual inspection of scattergrams
C. Stamou
190 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and bivariate correlations with calendar year for the
thirty-eight plays in his sample, and selected those
of an absolute correlation of 0.400 and above.
Twenty lemmata were accepted as suitable, then,
each one was separately regressed on a transforma-
tion of calendar year. Then, Brainerd selected the
ten18 best discriminators out of the final twenty
when tested on the nineteen accurately dated
plays. The ten discriminators were combined into
a multiple regression equation with cross-validation,
but detected instability in the regression coefficients
led to use of principal components analysis and
a more stable predictor. In phase three, regression
on principal components was used on the dubiously
dated nineteen plays for which the t-test determined
deviations of the predicted dates from the observed
ones for the plays Love’s Labour Lost, All’s Well
that Ends Well, King John, Richard III, Henry VIII,
Hamlet, and The Two Noble Kinsmen. Brainerd
attributed the deviations to mixed authorship for
The Two Noble Kinsmen, and possible revisions
made at later stages for the remaining plays.
Derks (1994) used the Regressive Imagery
Dictionary (RID) (Martindale, 1990) on thirty-
seven Shakespeare’s plays excluding Two Noble
Kinsmen and to different Shakespearean play
types (histories, comedies, tragedies) to measure
incongruous juxtaposition, primordial content,
and conceptual content as functions of time.19
Derks observed a very weak linear increase in
incongruous juxtaposition which was reinforced
when the variable was transformed into its quadratic
value. Primordial content was expected to decrease
with age reflecting preferences away from the
primitive and arousing that it represents, however,
although the trend was identified according to
expectations, it was not significant. Conceptual
content was expected to remain stable or even
decline with age in a typical individual, but not in
Shakespeare’s case, in which a high positive correla-
tion value was detected. When individual play types
were examined, incongruous juxtaposition was
observed to decline with date for histories, primor-
dial content dropped for tragedies and histories, and
conceptual content increased with tragedies and
histories. Overall, a tendency to alter content with
time was detectable in the Shakespearean plays.
Jackson (2002), using Oras’s (1960) pause data,
investigated Shakespeare’s stylistic development. The
data were based on inclusive counts of all pause
patterns (which also included heavy pauses and line-
split pauses) in all of the plays in the First Folio of
1623, as well on Pericles and The Two Noble Kinsmen
for which Oras had provided different counts on the
different authorial parts of the plays. A matrix of
Pearson product moment correlation coefficient was
produced for each play or part of play when
correlated with each other. Bivariate correlations
were interpreted as a measure of similarity between
plays based on pause patterns and written during
time frames of close proximity, hence representing
Shakespeare’s stylistic development. It was observed
that plays which tended to be highly correlated
(approximately r¼ 0.99) belong to roughly the same
chronological date according to the dating provided
by the Oxford Shakespeare’s chronology and in Wells
et al. (1987), whereas plays which were not in
chronological proximity, reached correlation values
approximately as low as 0.38 (the majority of the
correlations were smaller than 0.70). Jackson used his
results to stress that the correlations provided by his
study ‘provide independent testimony to the general
rightness of the Oxford chronology and the extra-
ordinary consistency of Shakespeare’s metrical
development’, although he noted that a number of
plays did not clearly support the Oxford chronology.
However, it remained unclear whether the data
provided by Oras were normalized for differences in
size and whether they were appropriate for analysis
with bivariate correlations.
4.3 Other studies
Craik and Kaferly (1987) investigated vowel and
consonant usage in Sophocles’ Trachiniae in order to
confirm scholarly assumptions which place the play
at an early date. This was achieved by the develop-
ment of a software program which detects and
describes in detail Greek phonological information
based on a standard transliteration table. All
Sophocles’ seven extant plays (280,413 letters) were
tested on vowel-to-consonant ratio (VCR), conso-
nant group representation, and consonant group
position as in initial, medial, or final, and consonant
group alliteration in trimeter sections. A VCR in
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 191
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
favour of consonants was observed accompanied by a
slight increase in vowel usage over the course of
Sophocles’ career. In addition, a trend for an increase
in initial consonants in the trimeter sections was
detected, suggesting that if the trend is genuine then
the Trachiniae should belong to the early period.
Furthermore, principal components analysis was
run in order to linearly combine the measurements
and observe their behaviour for the seven plays on a
two-dimensional graph. Accounting for 66.2% of
the variance, principal components analysis revealed
a strong association between dentals and sibilants
depicting a correlation between the measurements
and the second principal component. This suggested
that the first principal component represented the
‘maximum variation and the contrast among the
remaining consonant groups’ (Craik and Kaferly,
1987). Moreover, a striking separation was noticed
along the principal components between Philoctetes
and Oedipus Cycle which are generally attributed to
the late period indicating that since the remaining
plays do not show signs of such extreme variation,
possible stylistic changes have taken place over
time. For this purpose, the researchers suggested the
order of the Trachiniae, Antigone, Ajax (late 440s),
Oedipus Tyrannus (early 420s), Electra (410s),
Philoctetes (409), and Oedipus Cycle (401), since
the Trachiniae appears to be maximally separated
from Philoctetes and Oedipus Cycle; based on the
principal components graph, it was assumed that
the play may even be considered earlier from
Antigone and Ajax. However, more tests are required
for definite conclusions (Craik and Kaferly, 1987).
In 1999, Forsyth produced a study which
concentrated on Yeatsean chronology. Forsyth
utilized a quasi-random Monte Carlo search
algorithm to identify word substrings inclusive of
punctuation marks in 142 Yeatsean poems of
rather small length (1,000 character chunks approxi-
mately), which he thereafter assessed for distinctive-
ness in four separate experiments. In the first
experiment, ten poems were assigned to their correct
chronological period, which were not included in the
initial training sample. The study begun with a
random search for the identification of suitable short
substrings of random length between one and eight
in the training data set which were ranked based on
chi-square according to distinctiveness. The texts
were divided into groups of ‘young’ and ‘old’ of
relatively equal size using the year 1915 as cut-off
date. Eleven ‘young’ and nine ‘old’ substrings were
the final ones selected for convenience. When five
more poems were added to each category, in nine out
of ten of them, the count of the substrings was higher
in the appropriate category (Forsyth, 1999).
In the second experiment, two poems revised
approximately thirty years apart were examined for
inherent differences; it was observed that, during
revision, the number of old markers was increasing
and replacing the new markers. In the third experi-
ment, a linear regression formula was obtained by the
development of a Yeatsean index20 used as the inde-
pendent variable against year of composition. With
the addition of three more poems to balance out the
middle period, a highly significant R2 of 0.71 was
obtained. In the final experiment two short prose
extracts from two essays (450 words approximately
each) composed forty-six years apart were examined
based on the same substrings in order to assess the
appropriateness of the method on a different genre.
The extracts were correctly classified to their
chronological group based on observation, with the
exception of only two out of the twenty substrings
indicating otherwise (Forsyth, 1999).
In the same year, Forsyth et al. (1999) investigated
the authenticity of the Consolatio (1583) with the
secondary objective of testing methods previously
used only on English texts on the language of Latin.
However, as part of their analysis,21 in order to
accurately place the Consolatio in its appropriate time
frame and compare the language of the text with the
most suitable controls from the correct chronolog-
ical period, the research crossed into the field of
stylochronometry.
Using literary works by eleven authors—among
them Sigonio and Cicero themselves—amassed in
seventy samples of 305,000 total which covered the
classical and neo-Latin periods, the researchers
employed Burrow’s (1992)22 approach for fifty
most common words with no lemmatization exclud-
ing content ones. Moreover, word length in syllables
and syllable transition frequencies were automati-
cally obtained. Because syllable counts were unsuc-
cessful in positively affecting the analysis when
C. Stamou
192 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Cicero was compared with the classical authors and
Sigonio with the renaissance ones, it was decided to
test the variable across periods. Stepwise discrimi-
nant analysis without cross-validation was con-
ducted on all texts based on the dependent classical
and neo-Latin groups in order to classify the
Consolatio under one of those chronological cate-
gories. Three function words (ac, vel, vero) and four
syllabic transitions (ST13, ST22, ST43, ST44) proved
significant with 98.53% correct classification rate
except for one misclassified case in the neo-Latin
group, the most modern one of the classical texts
(Tacitus) (Forsyth et al., 1999).
Furthermore, stepwise multiple linear regression
was employed to obtain the Consolatio’s date by
using sixty-six of the securely dated texts, the century
of composition as the dependent variable, the forty-
six most common words, and the twenty-two syllabic
variables. The final five (ST44, ac, vel, S6, ST13)
selected with positive coefficients suggest that, for the
lexical variables and the six-syllable words, they are
characteristic of a more evolved Latin writing style,
although syllabic transitions did not provide a clear
interpretation, besides the possible explanation that
it is a product of a universal move from the classical
Latin to Neo-Latin. The final formula was tested on
the Consolatio which was eventually placed in the
later period. It would appear that syllabic informa-
tion, especially syllabic transitions are useful for
‘temporal discrimination’ (Forsyth et al., 1999).
To address the issue of inequality in text lengths
when measures of lexical richness are being investi-
gated within and across corpora, and to consider
whether vocabulary richness remains constant within
an author’s work across his life time, Smith and Kelly
(2002) proposed an experimental method which
relied on averaging measures of lexical richness
across different standardized nonoverlapping blocks
of the main text(s) under investigation. The
measures they explored were average values of
Yule’s constant K (Yule, 1994), Zipf’s Z parameter
(Orlov, 1983), average portion of hapax legomena,
average repetition of common words, and the length
of the classical text they were investigating in iambic
meters. The underlying assumption was that the
average measures do not depend on text length;
therefore, works may be compared in relation to each
other. The researchers tested the early and middle
comedies of Aristophanes (eleven plays), the middle
tragedies of Euripides (fourteen plays), and the old
comedies of Terence.
Initially, ANOVA (or Kruskal–Wallis rank sum
when appropriate) was used to test constancy, with
N¼ 300, of the average number of unique words per
chunk of N, the average number of hapax legomena
per chunk of N, and the average K per chunk of N.
Then, weighted linear regression was employed to
detect any association between the measures and
the date of the plays’ first performance. Prediction
intervals were also estimated to calculate perfor-
mance dates of plays not tested in the training
sample. The results for Aristophanes revealed that
the average number of hapaxes and average K were
significantly different over time with hapaxes
decreasing in frequency, while average K was found
to increase but not significantly. After consideration
of each play in its entirety, it was discovered that the
total number of words in iambics and constant K also
increased significantly over time, although constant
K showed sufficient variability. For Terence’s
comedies, only average vocabulary showed evidence
of change although not statistically significant.
However, its significant regression formula revealed
a positive pattern. When the comedies were in-
spected in their entirety, no measure displayed
significant changes. Finally, only the average
number of hapaxes showed significant trends on
Euripides’ middle tragedies, and with the exclusion
of the outlier Supplices, hapaxes were found to
significantly increase with time. Finally, the research-
ers concluded that the method followed ‘reveals the
possibility of significant variance of these measures of
vocabulary among works of a single author and
warns against the notion of some absolute authorial
stylistic character’ (Smith and Kelly, 2002).
5 Content Analysis in
Stylochronometry
A number of studies approaching stylochronometric
problems using content analysis, thus expanding
the tools available to the interested researcher,
have additionally been identified in the literature.
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 193
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Laffal (1997) used a general content dictionary
of 168 concepts to obtain frequency profiles for
a number of word categories on twenty-one collec-
tions of tales and poetry by Edgar Allan Poe totalling
191,165 words and covering the whole of his literary
career by two-year intervals in order to trace
a developmental time line in Poe’s literary output.
Obtaining z-score frequency profiles of the distribu-
tion of the word categories and incorporating them
into a factor-analysis, allowed Laffal to associate
each text with dominant categories on each positive
and negative side of the extracted factors. The texts
resulting in the highest loadings for each factor
were considered as characteristic of the factor,
while concepts associated with those texts were
selected based on significant z-scores. The time-
oriented factor was characterized by early concepts
of place, power, person values, nature, and body,
middle concepts like place, qualities, and ideation,
and late ones of union/separation, ideation, and
time. Death, which is the central theme in Poe’s
work, remained constant. The result was a clustering
of early and late texts at opposite ends of the
third and fourth factors, reinforcing the idea of
a detectable developmental life line in Poe’s
work although not in an absolute manner since
the position of ‘The Raven’ provided evidence of
a ‘continuation of earlier modes . . . among the later
texts. Equally, one might expect that intimations
of later ideas would occur in earlier work’ (Laffal,
1997).
Subsequently, Laffal associated events in Poe’s
life with the detected shifts, such as Poe’s brother’s
and wife’s death (in 1831 and 1847, respectively). It
seems that the death of Poe’s brother caused a
thematic shift from nature to union/separation
concepts resulting in higher concentration of quality
and utilitarian words, and fewer occurrences of
words of power, ideation, and person values.
The second thematic shift was observed around the
time of Poe’s wife’s death. Although the idea of death
was always of major concern to Poe, following
another major experience of loss, death attains a
more abstract value, seen as a ‘ ‘‘mediator of union
and separation’’ in a more philosophic [and]
kabbalistic overview of the creation and destiny of
man and the universe’ (Laffal, 1997).
Whissell (1999) examined Robert Frost’s poetry
to evaluate, among other things, imagery patterns
of variability in time. Her aim was to compare results
with related literary criticism which view Frost’s later
poetry as more complex than earlier productions.
Measuring increase in complexity reflected in
increase of rare words and reduction of most
common ones, Whissell found ‘no significant
correlation between the order of appearance of
Frost’s poems and their linguistic complexity’,
whereas the periods of early, middle, late were
overall indistinguishable from each other. However,
based on examination of variance, Whissell recorded
a significant increase in linguistic complexity within
individual poems of the later period, which led to the
conclusion that ‘Frost’s later poetry was occasionally
simpler and occasionally more complex than his
earlier work’ (Whissell, 1999). Furthermore, when
mental imagery was examined to assess the degree of
concreteness/abstraction in the poems, significantly
higher frequencies of abstraction were identified in
the later poetry based on a Kruskal–Wallis nonpara-
metric analysis of variance, although greater varia-
bility from the early poems to later ones was also
observed. Such findings lead to the conclusion that
Frost’s poetry was characterized by the tendency
towards abstract language and greater variability in
terms of both abstraction and complexity as the years
went by, rather than been driven by definitive
patterns. Finally, emotional restraint was observed
as stable.
Lastly, Pennebaker and Stone (2003) conducted a
psychology-oriented study in which fourteen lan-
guage dimensions23 were examined in the works of
four novelists, two playwrights, and four poets24
covering over nine million words and spanning over
500 years to minimize any cohort effects in order to
examine any relationships between aging and
language use. Bivariate correlations and forward
entry logistic regression analysis were utilized. The
underlying assumption was that ‘aging can affect
word usage’ (Pennebaker and Stone, 2003). Weak
but significant bivariate correlations revealed similar
patterns of correlations across all language dimen-
sions for all authors except Dickens, possibly
attributed to the limited amount of his available
data. Furthermore, forward entry logistic regression
C. Stamou
194 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
was used with the standardized language dimensions
to obtain predicted logits to correlate with each
author’s age. Larger correlations were interpreted as
showing ‘greater usage of language in an age-typed
manner’ (Pennebaker and Stone, 2003). In particu-
lar, it was observed that fewer self-references and
occurrences of more future tense verbs and cognitive
complexity tend to more complex cognitive patterns
with increasing age, whereas no patterns were
detected with positive or negative emotions, word
size, first person plural, social references, past and
present verbs, and time-related words. Significant
patterns were detected in Millay, Eliot, Baillie, Yeats,
Wordsworth, and Graves who revealed strong signif-
icant simple within-subject correlations between
their age and their respective aging coefficients. No
change was detected for Alcott, Austen, Dickens, and
Shakespeare.
6 Conclusion
The description of the presented stylochronometric
studies has made evident the plethora of subjec-
tively guided complex stylochronometric practices
according to the aims of the research at hand in
terms of text selection, text size, sample size, stylistic
markers, and statistical and computational methods,
not to mention frequent use of material of uncertain
composition date utilized for the completion of each
individual study. Stylistic development as expressed
by the frequency distributions of particular stylistic
characteristics, as well as sparse evidence of stylistic
stability in markers thought initially to depict
change, have been detected. In addition, inconsis-
tency in rectilinear trends was also present; that is,
not every marker in every author appeared to decline
in relation to advancing age; increasing trends were
noted, too. However, although it is not currently
possible to compare different studies due to lack of
a unified methodology and standardized approaches,
a number of different types of stylistic markers were
judged to be of interest based on their rate of
appearance:
(1) Punctuation marks: Whissell (1996), Forsyth
(1999), Jackson (2002).
(2) Character markers: Ledger (1989), Ule (1982),
Forsyth (1999).
(3) Parts of speech: Jaynes (1980), Ule (1982),
Opas (1996), Whissell (1996), Pennebaker
and Stone (2003).
(4) Most common words including function
words: Brainerd (1980), Ule (1982), Frischer
(1991), Forsyth et al. (1999), Whissell (1999),
Can and Patton (2004).
(5) Various word frequencies subjectively selected
and more closely related to content analysis:
Jaynes (1980), Derks (1994), Whissell (1996),
Laffal (1997), Pennebaker and Stone (2003).
(6) Syllable markers: Cox and Brandwood (1959),
Wishart and Leach (1970), Jaynes (1980),
Forsyth et al. (1999).
(7) Hapax legomena and/or hapax dislegomena:
Ule (1982), Smith and Kelly (2002).
(8) Vocabulary richness: Ule (1982), Smith and
Kelly (2002).
Other variable types shown to be more meter-
and genre-oriented (Brainerd, 1980; Devine and
Stephens, 1981; Cropp and Fick, 1985; Temple, 1996)
have been judged as rather specialized, therefore,
they have not been included in the list. It is
maintained that commonly used markers may be of
valuable use under the assumption that, since they
have been incorporated in more than one study, they
are of possible universal potential. It is also believed
that, at this stage, the devising or discovery of new
types of markers is not strictly necessary since
the markers already used by stylochronometrists
have not been fully explored. Consequently, their
further and detailed investigation is recommended
in order to identify the types of markers that work
best, ideally universally, the patterns they follow,
the different linguistic levels that are being com-
bined and affected by them, and the circumstances
under which detection and optimum function
occurs.
These markers may play a central role initially in
experimental studies which have been designed to
preferably incorporate either well-dated material or
material for which there is enough external evidence
to support detected patterns or lack of them, in
addition to some form of standardization regarding
text selection, text size, sample size, and statistical
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 195
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and computational methods which will offer an
opportunity for comparisons. Thus, it will be
possible to further observe standardization’s feasi-
bility and usefulness in stylochronometry as an
improved approach which will either distract
researchers from reinventing the wheel or accept it
as the only suitable solution.
However, the usefulness of such an extended
approach, besides the opportunity for direct com-
parisons and an automatic flavour to chronological
problems, lies in the fact that, even if no single
universal stylochronometer or type of it is even-
tually obtained, the possibility still exists that
stylistic markers or types would be able to categorize
authors in clusters according to detected patterns
assuming that some markers will continue to
work in some cases and not in others. Therefore,
instead of testing for one single universal styl-
ochronometer or type, it may be possible to test
three or four or more depending on the level of
detailed investigated.
Furthermore, other variables could possibly be
incorporated to account for dimensions not readily
captured by stylistic variables only, such as psycho-
logical factors, historical or personal events, health
issues, etc. since documents are neither produced in
isolation nor are completely independent from their
author, his/her immediate surroundings, the culture
he/she lives in, or time era. In addition, it would be of
interest to investigate any influence factors such as
authorship and genre may have on any detected
statistical trends, tested on a variety of suitable
textual material beyond the range of genre types
already investigated and not strictly belonging to
famous authors to examine the magnitude of stylistic
change that one may detect.
Stylochronometry has untapped potential and an
abundance of questions and problems that are
waiting to be re-defined and explored. It is hoped
that its complicated nature will attract enough
interest to rekindle the search for answers from a
different perspective and in a wider and less isolated
research scale than previously. It is expected that in
due course its results, be that positive or negative,
will contribute to the broader understanding of
the creativity process related to the written word, and
ultimately in the better understanding of the
individual human mind as it evolves in the course
of its life time.
Acknowledgements
I wish to thank my anonymous reviewers for their
valuable comments and suggestions. I would also
like to thank Dr Richard S. Forsyth, who has been
the driving force behind this work.
References
Biber, D. (1988). Variation Across Speech and Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brainerd, B. (1980). The chronology of Shakespeare’s
plays. Computers and the Humanities, 14: 221–30.
Brandwood, L. (1990). The Chronology of Plato’s
Dialogues. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burrows, J. F. (1987). Word-patterns and story-shapes:
the statistical analysis of literary style. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 2(2): 61–70.
Burrows, J. F. (1992). Not unless you ask nicely:
the interpretative nexus between analysis and
information. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 7(2):
91–109.
Campbell, L. (1867). The Sophistes and Politicus of Plato.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Can, F. and Patton, J. M. (2004). Change of writing style
with time. Computers and the Humanities, 38: 61–82.
Cox, D. R. and Brandwood, L. (1959). On a
discriminatory problem connected with the works
of Plato. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 21:
195–200.
Craik, E. M. and Kaferly, D. H. A. (1987). The computer
and Sophocles’ Trachiniae. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 2(2): 86–97.
Cropp, M. and Fick, G. (1985). Resolutions and
chronology in euripides: the fragmentary tragedies.
Bics Supplement, 43.
Devine, A. M. and Stephens, L. D. (1981). A new aspect
of the evolution of the trimeter in euripides.
Transactions of the American Philological Association,
111: 43–64.
Derks, P. L. (1994). Clockwork Shakespeare: the bard
meets the regressive imagery dictionary. Empirical
Studies of the Arts, 12(2): 131–9.
Duckworth, G. E. (1965). Horace’s hexameters and the
date of the Ars Poetica. TAPA, 96: 73–95.
C. Stamou
196 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Evans, B. G., Levin, H., Baker, H. et al. (1974). The
Riverside Shakespeare. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Forsyth, R. S. (1999). Stylochronometry with substrings,
or: a poet young and old. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 14(4): 467–77.
Forsyth, R. S., Holmes, D. I. and Tse, E. K. (1999).
Cicero, Sigonio, and Burrows: Investigating the
Authenticity of the Consolatio. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 14(3): 375–400.
Frischer, B. (1991). Shifting Paradigms: New Approaches
to Horace’s Arts Poetica. Atlanta GA Scholars Press.
Jackson, MacD. P. (2002). Pause patterns in
Shakespeare’s verse: canon and chronology. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 17(1): 37–46.
Jaynes, J. T. (1980). A search for trends in the poetic style
of W.B. Yeats. Association for Literary and Linguistic
Computing Journal, 1: 11–19.
Keyser, P. (1992). Stylometric method and the chronol-
ogy of Plato’s works (review article). Bryn Mawr
Classical Review, 1: 58–74.
Laffal, J. (1995). A concept analysis of Jonathan Swift’s ‘A
Tale of a Tub’ and ‘Gulliver’s Travels’. Computers and
Humanities, 29(5): 339–62.
Laffal, J. (1997). Union and separation in Edgar Allan
Poe. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 12(1): 1–13.
Ledger, G. (1989). Re-counting Plato: A Computer Analysis
of Plato’s Style. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Martindale, C. (1990). The Clockwork Muse: The
Predictability of Artistic Change. New York: Basic Books.
Opas, L. L. (1996). A Multi-Dimensional Analysis of
Style in Samuel Beckett’s Prose Works. In Hocking, S.
and Ide, N. (eds), Research in Humanities Computing 4.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Oras, A. (1960). Pause Patterns in Elizabethan and
Jacobean Drama. Gainesville, FL: University of Florida
Press.
Orlov, J. K. (1983). Ein Model der Ha¨ufigkeitsstruktur
des Vokabulars. Studies on Zipf’s Law. Bochum:
Brockmeyer.
Pennebaker, J. W., Francis, M. E. and Booth, R. J.
(2001). Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC):
LIWC2001. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum Publishers.
Pennebaker, J. W. and Stone, L. D. (2003). Words of
wisdom: language use over the lifespan. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85(2): 291–301.
Robinson, T. M. (1992). Plato and the computer. Ancient
Philosophy, 12: 375–82.
Smith, J. A. and Kelly, C. (2002). Stylistic constancy
and change across literary corpora: using measures of
lexical richness to date works. Computers and the
Humanities, 36: 411–30.
Temple, J. T. (1996). A multivariate synthesis of
published Platonic stylometric data. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 11(2): 67–75.
Thesleff, H. (1967). Studies in the Styles of Plato. Helsinki:
Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Kirjapaino.
Ule, L. (1982). Recent progress in computer methods of
authorship determination. Association of Literary
and Linguistic Computing Bulletin, 10(3): 73–89.
Wells, S., Taylor, G., Jowett, J. and Montgomery, W.
(1987). William Shakespeare: A Textual Companion.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Whissell, C. (1996). Traditional and emotional stylo-
metric analysis of the songs of Beatles Paul McCartney
and John Lennon. Computers and the Humanities, 30:
257–65.
Whissell, C. (1999). Holding emotional and linguistic
rulers up to the poetry of Robert Frost. Psychological
Reports, 85: 751–8.
Whissell, C., Fournier, M., Pelland, R., Weir, D. and
Makarec, K. (1986). A dictionary of affect in language:
IV. Reliability, validity, applications. Perceptual and
Motor Skills, 62: 875–88.
Wishart, D. and Leach, S. V. (1970). A multivariate
analysis of Platonic prose rhythm. Computer Studies in
the Humanities and Verbal Behaviour, 3: 90–9.
Yule, G. (1994). The Statistical Study of Literary
Vocabulary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Notes
1 The markers Jaynes selected were frequencies of heads
of noun phrases (nouns, pronouns), portion of head
which are nouns, ratio of determiners to nouns, ratio of
adjectives to nouns, ratio of preps to nouns, heads of
verbal phrases (main verb followed by infinitive
followed by participle), portion of heads which are
main verbs, ratio of auxiliary verbs to verbal phrase
heads, adverb proportion, conjunctions (coordinating
and subordinating conjunctions, and relative and
interrogative pronouns), portion of conjunctions
which are coordinators, miscellaneous such as clause
and phrase signal, ‘not’, and interjections, nominal to
verbal generalizations, preposition phrase words, and
predicate as part of the main clause-elements (predicate,
subject, compliment) (Jaynes, 1980).
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 197
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
2 Jaynes’s extra variables were first person pronouns,
mean proportion of monosyllabic words, ratio of
content to function words over the three life periods,
and the general vocabulary based on three identifiable
period-themes, namely Celtic-mythology-related
words additionally involving love and romance,
love and romance mixed with ‘words of a much
lower sort’ such as ‘dolt, sweat, drunkards, jolt’,
informality, and Classical Greek, Italian, and Modern
Irish mythical figures, and finally a compromise of
themes between the early and middle periods.
3 Biber (1988) identified a number of textual dimen-
sions able to distinguish between speech and writing
based on different situational contexts and verbal
production means and purposes.
4 The texts exhibiting such characteristics, which set
them apart from the earlier texts, had been produced
after the 1960s when Beckett had begun experimenting
with minimalism and had adopted the style for the
remainder of his life. In addition, ‘the spread of the
scores along all the dimensions also suggests versatility
in style not normally found in any other type of
discourse’ (Opas, 1996).
5 Emotional stylometry refers to a combination of
traditional stylometric measures such as word length,
word frequencies, use of first, second, and third person
personal pronouns, punctuation, type/token ratio,
song length, negatives, the definite and indefinite
articles, the conjunction ‘and’, word forms of ‘love’,
‘girl’, ‘dead’, whoops, hollers, and nonsense syllables.
6 According to the theory of word emotionality, a word
carries two different meanings, denotative or descrip-
tive and connotative or emotional. The former is
considered rather complex and hard to quantify,
whereas the latter may be represented by three
dimensions such as evaluation, potency, and activa-
tion—although in later years these dimensions have
been reduced to two, evaluation and activation,
since they are capable of explaining approximately
80% of the differences among words which have been
rated according to binary categories such as good–bad,
fast–slow, etc. (Whissell, 1996). In the present study,
Whissell extended her examination of word emotion-
ality to six emotional measures, namely pleasantness,
activation, nastiness, cheerfulness, sadness, and soft-
ness (Whissell, 1996).
7 In particular, Ledger used thirty-seven variables
which represented the proportion of words containing
certain letters; ALETS corresponds to the proportion
of words containing a given letter, BLETS those words
which end in a given letter, and CLETS words that
contain a letter in penultimate position.
8 Minimum spanning tree (MST) is an algorithmic aid
which joins each point in multidimensional space to
its nearest neighbor in order to clearly define relations
(Temple, 1996).
9 The reply variables were excluded from the second
analysis since reply data for all the dialogues do not
exist.
10 The nine different variable types that Ule (1982) used
were percentage of one, two, three, up to forty-letter
words; length of sentences in terms of one, two, three,
up to forty-words per sentence; relative frequencies
per 100 of the forty most common words in
Elizabethan plays; relative frequencies per 100 of
forty prepositions found in Elizabethan English,
forty function words; twenty-six letters of the alphabet
and the ten Arabic numbers; relative frequencies
per 100 of hapax legomena, hapax dislegomena up to
words occurring forty times; the percentage frequency
distribution of n times Vn; and the percentage relative
vocabulary overlap (RVO).
11 Euclidean distance calculates the square root of
the sum of squares and produces a sequence of
composition according to which the distance between
neighboring texts is minimum.
12 These were ad, sed, per, and nec (Frischer, 1991).
13 Two analyses were performed, one for ad, sed, and per,
and one for nec. This is because the first three words
had similar distributions of a ‘high-low-high pattern’
in all the chronological periods whereas nec had ‘the
mirror reversal of the first’ (Frischer, 1991).
14 Although this was true only when the first three
function words were examined.
15 Porson’s bridge refers to ‘the nature of the word
boundaries permitted to stand between a long third
anceps and the final cretic segment of the trimeter’
(Devine and Stephens, 1981).
16 The period before 431 is characterized by the plays
Alcestis, Medea, and Hippolytus (Cropp and Fick,
1985).
17 As Brainerd (1980) explains, split lines occur ‘when a
verse line begun by one character is finished by a
second’.
18 The ten selected variables were relative frequency of
split lines among lines of verse, ‘because’, the lemma
might, ‘most’, ‘which’, and the lemma who which
showed an increasing pattern, and the lemma more,
the lemma with, the lemma unto, and ‘why’ which
were depicted as declining.
19 Incongruous juxtaposition refers to the ‘presence of
distant metaphors’ as measured by ‘structured meta-
phors . . . creative combinations of words [and] . . .
approach-avoidance’ word pairs like sweet–sorrow,
C. Stamou
198 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
senior–junior, etc. Primordial content refers to words
that indicate primitive and arousing drives and
sensations expressed by mental material. Finally,
conceptual content refers to ‘analysis, discrimination,
and conscious awareness’ (Derks, 1994).
20 The Yeatsean index is of the form YYIX¼ (YYOY)/
(YYþOY). YYIX stands for Yeatsean Index, YY for
Young Yeats and OY for Old Yeats.
21 It had emerged that the language of the text is
uncharacteristic of Cicero’s writing style, with a high
probability that it had been composed during the
renaissance and not during the classical era. The
analysis also pointed at Sigonio being the most likely
author; however, the result was inconclusive, possibly
due to Sigonio’s superb skills as an imitator of Cicero.
22 Burrows’s approach concentrates on the location
of the most common words in the text under
investigation (which could range from thirty to 100,
for example, while usually content words are
excluded) and the use of those words as stylistic
markers based on rates of occurrence. Often these
markers are analysed with the help of multivariate
statistics (Forsyth et al., 1999).
23 The language dimensions examined were emotional
processes (positive emotions, negative emotions),
social and identity concerns (first person singular,
first person plural, social references), time orienta-
tions (time-related words, past tense verbs, present
tense verbs, future tense verbs), and cognitive
complexity (words greater than six letters, total
cognitive words, causation, insight, exclusive)
(Pennebaker and Stone, 2003). The language dimen-
sions were measured with the help of LIWC 2001
(Pennebaker et al., 2001).
24 The authors were Charles Dickens, Louisa May
Alcott, Jane Austen, and George Eliot (novelists),
William Shakespeare and Joanna Baillie (play-
wrights), and St Vincent Millay, William Butler
Yeats, Robert Graves, and William Wordsworth
(poets).
Stylochronometry
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 199
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
