
While the mechanics and rationale for applying text
encoding to humanities materials are by now rela-
tively well understood, it is less clear how we might
enhance the value of documents marked up in, say
TEI,1 with external frameworks for the scholarly
interpretation of entities mentioned within an
original text. This article presents and discusses
one possible approach, taken on a project to digitize
historical sources, and using technologies more
traditionally associated with the Semantic Web.
For similar approaches in the digital humanities
see Boot (2006, 2007), Carracciolo (2006), Eide
and Ore (2006), Poupeau (2006).
The Henry III Fine Rolls project,2 funded by
Arts and Humanities Research Council, is a
collaborative venture between King’s College
London (Department of History and Centre for
Computing in the Humanities) and The National
Archives of the United Kingdom. It aims to produce
both print and digital editions, using as a model
the format of the traditional printed calendar (an
English summary of records, plus a set of indexes),
of the parchment rolls (see Fig. 1 for an example of
roll membrane) compiled between 1216 and 1248,3
which record mainly (but not only) offers of money
made to King Henry III of England in exchange for
Correspondence:
Arianna Ciula, Centre for
Computing in the
Humanities, King’s College
London, 2nd Floor, 26-29
Drury Lane, London WC2B
5RL, UK.
E-mail:
arianna.ciula@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
311
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn018 Advance Access Published on 12 September 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a wide range of concessions and favours. A total of
sixty-four rolls containing around 800 parchment
membranes, one for almost all of the fifty-six years
of Henry III’s reign from 1216–72, survive in The
National Archives. Each fine roll was compiled in
Latin by a handful of scribes. Taken as a body of
documentary evidence, the rolls are of ‘prime
importance in the study of political, social, and eco-
nomic history and of government and administra-
tion at a local and national level.’ (Dryburgh, 2006)
Fig. 1 Sample image of one of the fine rolls membranes (TNA C 60/8, m. 2).  Crown copyright images reproduced by
permission of The National Archives, London, England
A. Ciula et al.
312 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The first version of the project website was
launched on May 2007 and incorporates a wide
range of features, which include facsimiles, text
translations, image-text connections, indexes of
people, places and subjects, and a combined
search facility. The edited English summary of the
text can therefore be browsed and read as a single
unit roll by roll (available in this form for the first
time, since the fine rolls have not been published
in their entirety before; see Dryburgh, 2006), com-
pared against the images of the rolls membranes or
recalled entry by entry through the indexes or the
search, which allow unprecedented breadth and ease
of access to the material.
1 Sources and Interpretative
Layers: TEI Mark-up and Beyond
At the core of the resource are the translated
summaries of the fine rolls, which have been
encoded using TEI P4 XML,4 in order to make
explicit:
 the physical structure of the roll—for instance,
the fact that it is composed of a series of mem-
branes stitched together;
 the structure of the English calendar, a concise
translation of the Latin records, including county
and date information concerning the record,
body of each entry and witness lists;
 the semantic content of the roll—for instance,
names of individuals, names of locations, and
key themes mentioned in the text.
TEI offers an excellent framework for representing
the structure and semantics of the core texts and the
corpus of TEI texts encoded for the Henry III Fine
Rolls project is in itself a rich resource. Nevertheless,
from a scholarly point of view an extra layer of
interpretation is needed in order to fully realize
the benefit of encoding the documents. Historical
documents such as the fine rolls do not only consist
of a textual corpus that documents facts, but can
also be considered as sources that give insights
into the context of the facts they record. One
direct consequence of a socio-historicist approach
of this kind towards the text is that the historical
value extends from the text itself to what it reveals
about its context of production. The documentary
evidence then becomes potentially useful to the
scholar as a conceptual framework that can be
used to study various aspects of a given society in
depth, including its prosopography and genealogy,
toponomastics, politics, and economy.
It is no coincidence that the occurrences of
names of persons, places and institutions, and
their mutual relationships are considered particu-
larly relevant to the study of the fine rolls. They
are the means by which historians can get to the
heart of the medieval sources as clues to the life
and culture of the time. To give some sense of
the scale of this, for the period 1216 to 1224—
approximately a quarter of the period covered by
the first phase of the project—the researchers have
identified 3,436 men, 499 women, around 4,070
locations and 1,159 subjects.
Occurrences of people, places, and subjects in the
text were marked up to a high level of detail, includ-
ing such features as the components of a person’s
name, together with any reference to his or her
occupation and relationship(s) with other individ-
uals. However, the process of encoding an entry in
the fine rolls privileges the information available in
that particular context and lacks the breadth of
an overall perspective on the fine rolls as an histor-
ical object.
Although, the mark-up is able to capture some
aspects of the implicit associations between places,
persons, and subjects in the documents—and to a
certain extent the new TEI P5 chapter on names and
dates further facilitates this type of encoding,5 and
does so in a systematic manner—this should be
complemented with an extra interpretative layer
that is both connected to, and independent of, the
mark-up itself.
For this reason, the relevant data from the mark-
up was extracted and integrated within a set of
authorities first to identify the semantic mark-up
of persons, subjects, or places as textual references
to the correspondent instances of a logical authority,
i.e. of a defined entity with characteristic properties;
and second to express complex relationships
between these authorities and therefore between
their instances (see Fig. 2).
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 313
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
After conducting a comparative evaluation
of possible standards to create authority list
structures—including research into Topic Maps
(see Tuohy, 2005) and MADS (Metadata
Authority Description Schema)—we opted for
RDF/OWL,6 a combination of technologies com-
monly associated with the Semantic Web to repre-
sent and exchange knowledge.
The strength of RDF/OWL lies in its ability to
model data as a logical representation open to a
flexible manipulation of its meanings. In particular,
OWL supports a rich expression of the relationships
among defined objects or entities, allowing for the
capture of knowledge within a given domain of
interest in such a way that complex semantics can
be built up from simpler concepts.
In more practical terms, our choice of RDF/OWL
was driven by a number of factors, including: our
interest in facilitating interconnections with other
Digital Humanities projects, particularly those cov-
ering similar periods and subject areas, using inter-
national standards at the heart of the Semantic Web;
the relative maturity of supporting tools; and the
fact that RDF/OWL can be expressed in XML
format, thus allowing the easy re-purposing of
data for web delivery.
2 Creation of the Ontological
Framework
We started the process by carrying out a very detailed
analysis of what we needed to model, so as to repre-
sent the ‘world’7 (Thomas, 2004) of the fine rolls in
abstract terms with an ontology. Nevertheless, a key
principle for our approach was to create a source-
based model where the TEI documents themselves
were used to populate the ontology.8
This source-driven (see Fig. 3) approach meant
that—as paradoxical as it may sound—Henry III
himself did not in fact formally exist in our ontology
until his name was actually mentioned in the fifth
entry of the first roll. Similarly, the nature of
Fig. 3 The process by which the mark-up is used to populate the ontology
Fig. 2 Example of authority–document and authority–
authority associations
A. Ciula et al.
314 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
his family relationships and the fact that he wit-
nessed some fine rolls writs himself is again infor-
mation extracted from the XML documents and
transposed into the ontology. However, the precise
identification of those kinships, and (for instance)
the fact that he was King of England from 1216
to 1272, are statements that had to be added directly
to his authority record in the ontology by the
editors.
It is also interesting to note that we were able to
automate the extraction of certain combinations of
nested elements from the source XML to feed the
ontology so that, for example, a <placeName>
(place name element) nested within a
<persName> (person name element) was translated
into different types of association between the spe-
cific person and the place. For example, the nesting
of place name inside a person name could imply the
occurrence of a toponymic surname (e.g. Henry of
London) as well as the occurrence of a location that
forms a component of the name of an official (e.g.
constable of the Tower of London). This represents
only one of the stages in the process of disambigu-
ating the encoding—in this case the hierarchy of
nested elements—and translating the co-occurrence
of certain combinations of elements into specific
types of semantic relationships between concepts.
The XML files not only provided the skeleton of
the ontology, but also function as entities within the
overall model. The set of entries in the TEI
documents constitute one of the concepts being
modelled. Indeed, it could be argued that a faithful
historical perspective requires for each reference to a
person name, place name, or subject, to be asso-
ciated with the corresponding textual evidence.
In such a model, which aims to include ‘explicit
statements of the sources of the assertions exhibited
in the text’ (Eide, 2008, p. 36),9 references to the
relationships between people, as well as references to
the different roles they may perform, need also to be
anchored to specific loci in the documents where
they are stated (see Fig. 4).
The RDF/OWL scheme of classes and predicates
was used to define the over-arching knowledge
domain which we developed for the core materials
of the project. We do not intend to provide a
detailed description of this ontological structure
here,10 but it is worth highlighting our main under-
lying objectives, which were:
 to exploit existing established vocabularies
for specific domains such as geography, temporal
entities, and cultural heritage representation—
for instance, CIDOC CRM, Dublin Core,
Geo, Simple Knowledge Organization System,
W3C Time—so as to make explicit connections
between our work and similar undertakings
within the Semantic Web framework;11
 to refine our model and make it reusable for
projects that deal specifically with historical
sources of a certain period (so, for instance, it
Fig. 4 Explicit associations between the fine rolls source and specific assertions
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 315
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
would be possible for another project to make
use of the historical subdivisions of England
into so-called Hundreds or Wapentakes,12 as
defined in our model).
In order to achieve the first objective, existing
predicates were used as extensively as possible.
Amongst the numerous predicates we have
borrowed from extant ontology vocabularies,
we would particularly like to call attention
to the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model.
This vocabulary for knowledge representation pro-
vides definitions and a formal structure to describe
concepts and relationships relevant to the cultural
heritage sector. To give one example, we have used
the class cidoc:E53.Place to define places in conjunc-
tion with some object properties that express the
geopolitical inclusion of a Place within another
Place, or the fact that a Place was the stage for a
certain event (Ore, forthcoming). In our model
another class, cidoc:E21.Person, has been used to
describe supposedly real persons that were men-
tioned in the fine rolls. In turn, some of the
CIDOC object properties that we used allowed us
to model the statement that a Person participated in
a certain event, or to assert the fact that a Person is
identified by a Role or a Relationship.
In addition to making large use of already estab-
lished vocabularies, we have also created ad hoc con-
cepts and project-defined classes and properties
where required: for instance, the property frh3:topo-
nym_name_main, which allows us to express a per-
son’s surname in terms of a toponym (see Fig. 5),
or, to give another example, a series of properties to
facilitate expressions of uncertainty.
The main classes of the fine rolls ontology
(see Fig. 6) are defined as follows:
1. Documents: in our case, these constitute fine
rolls entries ‘that make propositions about
reality’ (Crofts et al., 2007), which are sub-
sumed under the class cidoc:E31.Document.
It is important to note here that we also
use some of the Dublin Core Meta Data
Terms to assign a title and an identifier to
each entry.
2. Any relevant authority belongs to the class
Authority, which is composed of the three
subclasses of Person, Place, and Subject. The
object properties of Authority are defined pri-
marily to express relationships between two
Authority individuals, or between an
Authority and the documents.
3. ‘Something’ about an authority as described
in the documents is modelled using the class
Factoid, a concept borrowed from the proso-
pographical projects developed at the Centre
for Computing in the Humanities (Bradley
and Short, 2005). It consists of three sub-
classes: Role, Relationship, and a hybrid con-
cept between these two that we have called
Role_Relationship (e.g. the tailor of the King,
or the steward of the archbishop). The object
properties of Factoid relate a Factoid to other
Factoids, to Authority individuals and to the
documents.
In turn, the subclasses mentioned above have
further children. The Role class, to name one, itself
contains an extensive list of subclasses, each one
representing a role (or to be more precise an
occupation/status—e.g. Abbot, King, Sheriff). Some
of the properties that the class Role inherits from
its super-class Factoid are refined to impose
further restrictions; for instance the property
cidoc:P11F.had_participant for the subclass of Role
called Nun can only apply to individuals belonging
to the Woman class.
Evidently, the value and granularity of the ontol-
ogy depends on various factors, which include the
richness of the source files themselves (e.g. how well
do the fine rolls express the reality of the careers of
officials in the thirteenth century?), the specific
focus of the researchers (e.g. on the types of fines
rather than on the amount of money they keep
record of), and the definability of the knowledge
domain itself (as evident in the contrast between
the identification of individuals and the much
more blurred identification of subjects).
Fig. 5 Example of the property frh3:toponym_name_main
with the Henry III Fine Rolls project namespace
A. Ciula et al.
316 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3 Relationship between Mark-up
and Ontology
As we have seen, the authorities and their network
of associations within the ontology are not only
complementary to the mark-up, but also represent,
in some cases, alternatives, or corrections. To give a
concrete example, references to relevant themes,
identified as such by the editors, have been
marked up following a flat encoding system, in
which each subject is considered to be independent
from other themes and is encoded with a key attri-
bute in the mark-up linking it to the ontology.
In the ontology, these references are represented
as instances of the authority called Subject. They are
therefore associated with the entries in the docu-
ments which contain the references, but, at the
same time, they have been mutually connected
following a hierarchical and associative structure,
identified by the project editors, of broader and
narrower thematic clusters (see Fig. 7).
The current default index of subjects on the web-
site (which also appears in the print volume) uses
this structure of connected topics.
To give another example of a situation where the
ontology complements the mark-up, there are cases
where the scribes wrote something incorrectly or
imprecisely. The edition of the fine rolls aims to
keep these so-called lapsus calami, or errors, high-
lighting their occurrence with ‘sic.’, as is common
editorial practice.13 However, the ontology corrects
what in the perspective of the historian are impre-
cise or incomplete assertions and makes alternative
statements.
Fig. 6 Structure of the ontology: only the classes closer to the root are shown here
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 317
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Take one example where the scribe mistakenly
wrote that ‘Alice is sister of Alice’, while in fact it
is quite clear from the context that the text should
state ‘Alice is sister of Sabina’. So while in the mark-
up we only record the assertion that a kinship is
mentioned, in the ontology that relationship is spe-
cified as being a sisterhood between two differently
identified individuals: alice23 and sabina02.
Moreover, the ontology also records the fact that
Alice is identified by that relationship: in other
words, her existence is only manifested by her rela-
tionship to Sabina, about whom we have more
information (see Figs 8 and 9).
If scholars are to take full advantage of the
potential that RDF/OWL provides for formalizing
complex associations, it is crucial that the tool
kit they use facilitates the editing process by
enabling them to perform sophisticated scholarly
modelling while concealing some of the technical
complexity.
First of all, our own set of editorial checking
facilities—built using the XSLT transformation lan-
guage before importing the data into the ontology—
has supported the editors in the transition from the
editing of the text through to its analysis and
processing into indexes. In more concrete terms,
this intermediate transition from the XML encod-
ing to the editing of the network of authorities
has allowed the systematic checking and rational-
ization of the mark-up especially in the case of
identifications.
Second, in building the ontology and managing
the data we have used a java-based application
called Prote´ge´-OWL,15 a free, open source ontology
editor, and knowledge-base framework. Using its
suite of tools we first constructed various prototypes
of the ontological model, then tested them with
some sample data and finally customized the appli-
cation to edit the data imported from the XML files.
Not surprisingly, the structure of the ontology is
subject to continuous refinement and Prote´ge´ has
responded well to this need.
Once set up, the editing tools have mainly been
used by our historian colleagues, who are now able
to perform relatively complex operations such as
creating subclasses, adding, merging, and splitting
instances, as well as being able to perform direct
queries on the ontology.
Fig. 7 Connection between the source text (where the reference to a subject is encoded), the ontology (where subjects
are organized in thematic clusters), and the output (where the index of subjects is produced)
A. Ciula et al.
318 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 9 Jambalaya14 graph where the instances and properties expressed by the code in Fig. 8 are visualized by
rhomboids and coloured arches, respectively
Fig. 8 Occurrence of alice23 as asserted in the source text in connection with a corresponding authority in the
ontology, where, among other things, she is identified by her sister sabina02
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 319
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4 Digital and Print Publication
The fact that RDF/OWL is expressed in XML facil-
itates the re-purposing of data for both web and print
delivery. Intermediate RDF/OWL XML files are pro-
duced using XSLT transformations on the ontologi-
cal source data and are used by the print and web
publication process at different stages and with dif-
ferent refinements (see Fig. 10).16 For the website,
these files are in turn processed using xMod,17 the
publishing framework developed at the Centre for
Computing in the Humanities, running within
Cocoon,18 to produce the website indexes. A parallel
print publication process applies XSL-FO to a
semantically less rich version of the same material
to produce the print indexes.19,20 The same inter-
mediate structure in XML format is used to produce
the search function (see Fig. 11).
The search facilities for the fine rolls project
were created using Ereuna,21 a configurable frame-
work that governs the extraction of relevant data
from the ontology (Step 1 in Fig. 11) as well as
from the original TEI files, which feeds the pro-
cessed data to the search engine Apache Lucene
(Step 3),22 processes search queries (Step 4), and
returns search results (Step 5).
The use of OWL also has other more important
advantages indirectly related to delivery issues, such
as the ability to process the data logically and infer
information that is not explicitly asserted in
the source-based ontology. So, for example, if
Margaret de Beaumont were described as the ‘wife
of Saer de Quincy’ in a document, without the use
of the ontology we could only search for occur-
rences of her as the ‘wife of Saer de Quincy’.
However, because OWL allows us to define and
process associations, we can also say that if
Margaret de Beaumont is wife of Saer de Quincy,
she is participating in a precise type of relation-
ship—a marriage—where both the participants
have identified roles. We can easily deduce that
Saer de Quincy is the husband of Margaret de
Beaumont, thereby enabling the creation of a
much richer search mechanism.
So far we have concentrated our efforts on lever-
aging the more obvious benefits of the RDF/OWL
approach to produce a sophisticated, multi-relational
and searchable resource, but in the future we hope
to exploit its potential to the full to generate other
outcomes which include:
1. further research into the application of a rea-
soner, which is a tool that can check for con-
sistency and deduce inferences in the current
OWL data model by processing assertions;
2. experimentation with more innovative ways
of delivering the data, such as two- or three-
dimensional visualizations.
5 Conclusions
In general terms, we believe that the approach we
have described is perfectly transferable to other his-
torical projects. Besides the broader sharing of
models and methods, there is also a more circum-
scribed level of interchange that this sort of technol-
ogy encourages. It is very likely that the same people
and locations that are mentioned in the fine rolls
from 1216 to1272 are also stated in other related
sources, and we hope to explore connections to
other projects researching the period in the fullness
of time. It is also likely that other sources or other
scholars may assert different if not conflicting
statements about the same events: the ontological
model has the potential to allow effective com-
munication between these propositions by sup-
porting an infrastructure of potentially multiple
interpretations and by anchoring them to their
evidence in the sources.
While the relationship between the TEI XML files
and the ontology has proven to be quite powerful, it
has not been without difficulties. Whilst we have
successfully populated the ontology with data
extracted from the mark-up, it still remains for us
to refine the inverse process, so that the mark-up
itself can benefit from the process of editing the
ontology. A common occurrence is that an editor
realizes that two individuals, identified as separate
in the mark-up, can in fact be merged into the same
authority, using contextual information available
only in the ontology that disambiguates the original
splitting. While this is a relative easy operation to
perform in the ontology, should this knowledge be
fed back into the mark-up? Ideally, we would like to
A. Ciula et al.
320 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
keep the two resources synchronized, but the
technical implications of achieving this are
daunting.
In more abstract terms, the prototyping of the
ontology has led to the reification into classes of
what we had originally defined as properties, as is
the case for institutions and roles/occupations,
which were originally considered to be properties
of place and person, respectively, but which
were then expanded as entities in their own right.
The mark-up then had to be refined accordingly.
This is a case where the process of modelling the
ontology has affected the editorial strategy of the
fine rolls calendar itself.
Fig. 10 Diagram of the integration of digital and print publication
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 321
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 12 Jambalaya graph showing the distribution of types of family relationships mentioned in the fine rolls for the
period 1216–24
Fig. 11 Search facility
A. Ciula et al.
322 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Finally, the ontology not only enables the editors
to refine the associations captured at a lower level in
the mark-up, but also helps to contextualize these
details on a wider scale, which in turn encourages a
conscious disengagement from the idiosyncrasies of
the text in favour of the bigger picture (see for
instance, Fig. 12).
In conclusion, we believe that the use of an onto-
logical approach, in conjunction with TEI XML
mark-up for encoding the sources, represents a
powerful technical framework for historical projects,
which balances respect for the text as unique witness
with the need to represent its historical context and
interpretation.
Acknowledgements
The Henry III Fine Rolls project is a collaborative
project that depends on the contribution of individ-
uals from various institutions (in particular The
National Archives and King’s College London in
the UK). The project website23 provides a full list
of those who have participated, but we would like to
acknowledge Gautier Poupeau for his crucial
research contribution and work in setting up an
initial ontological model with us. We would also
like to thank the following people for their advice
and contributions in preparing this article: John
Bradley, Paul Dryburgh, Beth Hartland, Tamara
Lopez, Paul Vetch.
References
Boot, P. (2006). Decoding emblem semantics. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 21: 15–27.
Boot, P. (2007). Mesotext. Framing and exploring anno-
tations. In Stronks, E. and Boot, P. (eds), Learned Love.
Proceedings of the Emblem Project Utrecht Conference on
Dutch Love Emblems and the Internet (November 2006).
Dans: DANS Symposium Publications 2, The Hague,
pp. 211–25.
Bradley, J. and Short, H. (2005). Texts into databases: the
evolving field of new-style prosopography. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 20(suppl. 1): 3–24.
Caracciolo, C. (2006). Designing and implementing an
ontology for logic and linguistics. Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 21: 29–39.
Ciula, A. (2003). Searching the Fine Rolls: A
Demonstration of the Electronic Version. Paper presented
at the International Medieval Congress 2006, University
of Leeds, July 10–13.
Crofts, N., Doerr, M., Gill, T., Stead, S., Stiff, M. (eds).
(2007). Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference
Model. Version 4.2.2. August. http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr
(accessed August 2008).
Dryburgh, P. (2006). Henry III Fine Rolls Project. Paper
presented at the Institute of Historical Research,
London, February 9.
Dryburgh, P. and Hartland, B. (eds), Ciula, A. and
Vieira, J. M. (tech. eds) (2007). Calendar of the Fine
Rolls of the Reign of Henry III [1216-1248]. I: 1216-1224.
Woodbridge: Boydell & Brewer.
Eide, Ø. (2008). The exhibition problem. A real life exam-
ple with a suggested solution. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 23: 27–37.
Eide, Ø. and Ore, C. (2006).TEI, CIDOC-CRM and a pos-
sible interface between the two. In Digital Humanities
2006. The First ADHO International Conference:
Conference Abstracts. Universite´ Paris-Sorbonne. http://
www.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf
(accessed August 2008).
Horridge, M., Knublauch, H., Rector, A., Stevens, R.,
Wroe, C. (2004). A practical guide to building
OWL ontologies using the Prote´ge´-OWL plugin and
CO-ODE tools edition 1.0. http://www.co-ode.org/
resources/tutorials/ProtegeOWLTutorial.pdf (accessed
August 2008).
Ore, C. (forthcoming). New digital assets - how to inte-
grate them? In Vogeler G. (ed.), Digitale Diplomatik.
Die historische Arbeit mit Urkunden in der Digitalen
Welt. Akten der internationalen Fachtagung in
Mu¨nchen 28.2.-2.3. 2007. Archiv fu¨r Diplomatik,
Beiheft. Ko¨ln: Bo¨hlau-Verlag.
Poupeau, G. (2006). De l’index nominum a` l’ontologie.
Comment mettre en lumie`re les re´seaux sociaux dans
les corpus historiques nume´riques? In Digital
Humanities 2006. The First ADHO International
Conference: Conference Abstracts. Universite´ Paris-
Sorbonne. http://www.allc-ach2006.colloques.paris-
sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf> (accessed August 2008).
Spence, P. (2006) The Henry III Fine Rolls Project.
In Digital Humanities 2006. The First ADHO
International Conference: Conference Abstracts.
Universite´ Paris-Sorbonne. http://www.allc-ach2006.
colloques.paris-sorbonne.fr/DHs.pdf (accessed August
2008).
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 323
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Spence, P. and Vetch, P. (2004). xMod and XML
Publication. Paper presented at Digital Resources for
the Humanities (DRH), Newcastle upon Tyne, 5–8
September. http://drh2004.ncl.ac.uk/abstract.php?
abstract¼246 (accessed August 2008).
TEI Consortium, (eds) (2007). TEI P5: Guidelines for
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Version
1.0.1. Last updated on 3rd February 2008. TEI
Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/Guidelines/P5/
(accessed August 2008).
Thomas, W. G. III. (2004). Computing and the historical
imagination. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., and
Unsworth, J. (eds), A Companion to Digital
Humanities. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 56–68.
Tuohy, C. (2005). Using XML Topic Maps to present TEI.
Paper presented at the 5th TEI Meeting, Sofia, October
28–9.
Vieira, J. M. and Ciula, A. (2007). Implementing an RDF/
OWL Ontology on Henry the III Fine Rolls. Paper pre-
sented at OWLED 2007, Innsbruck, June 6–7. http://
www.webont.org/owled/2007/PapersPDF/submission_6.
pdf (accessed August 2008).
Notes
1 See http://www.tei-c.org (accessed August 2008).
2 The project website is http://www.frh3.org.uk (accessed
August 2008).
3 Further funding was awarded in November 2007 to
encode the remaining fine rolls of Henry III up to the
year 1272 (the end of his reign). The Department of
History and American Studies at Canterbury Christ
Church University, Kent, became a partner in the
second phase of the project.
4 The encoding model developed for the project has been
described in Ciula (2003). An experimental framework
based on TEI P5 was also developed and is described in
Spence (2006).
5 See the chapter on Names, Dates, People, and Places in
TEI Consortium (2007). http://www.tei-c.org/release/
doc/tei-p5-doc/html/ND.html (accessed August 2008).
6 OWL is a language developed on top of RDF by W3C
to write ontologies. Indeed, while the latter facilitates
the representation of data, it is the former that elevates
this representation to a meaningful data model, where
relationships between objects are defined in semantic
terms and therefore can be reasoned upon automati-
cally. Quoting the W3C documentation: ‘The
Semantic Web is a vision for the future of the Web in
which information is given explicit meaning, making it
easier for machines to automatically process and inte-
grate information available on the Web. The Semantic
Web will build on XML’s ability to define customized
tagging schemes and RDF’s flexible approach to repre-
senting data. The first level above RDF required for the
Semantic Web is an ontology language what [sic] can
formally describe the meaning of terminology used in
Web documents. If machines are expected to perform
useful reasoning tasks on these documents, the lan-
guage must go beyond the basic semantics of
RDF Schema.’ http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/
(accessed August 2008). Furthermore, ‘Ontologies are
critical for applications that want to search across or
merge information from diverse communities.
Although, XML DTDs and XML Schemas are sufficient
for exchanging data between parties who have agreed to
definitions beforehand, their lack of semantics prevent
machines from reliably performing this task given new
XML vocabularies. The same term may be used with
(sometimes subtle) different meaning in different con-
texts, and different terms may be used for items that
have the same meaning. RDF and RDF Schema begin to
approach this problem by allowing simple semantics to
be associated with identifiers. With RDF Schema, one
can define classes that may have multiple subclasses and
super classes, and can define properties, which may
have sub properties, domains, and ranges. In this
sense, RDF Schema is a simple ontology language.
However, in order to achieve interoperation between
numerous, autonomously developed and managed
schemas, richer semantics are needed. For example,
RDF Schema cannot specify that the Person and Car
classes are disjoint, or that a string quartet has exactly
four musicians as members.’ http://www.w3.org/TR/
webont-req/ (accessed August 2008). For W3C specifi-
cations on RDF see http://www.w3.org/RDF/ (accessed
August 2008). For an overview and further resources on
OWL see http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/ (accessed
August 2008).
7 As Thomas states: ‘The goal for historians working in
the new digital medium needs to be to make the com-
puter technology transparent and to allow the reader to
focus his or her whole attention on the ‘‘world’’ that the
historian has opened up for investigation, interpreta-
tion, inquiry, and analysis. Creating these worlds, devel-
oping the sequences of evidence and interpretation and
balancing the demands and opportunities of the tech-
nology will take imagination and perseverance.’
(Thomas, 2004, pp. 66–67). Indeed, the direct experi-
ence on this act of modelling has proved very imagina-
tive and particularly challenging when the collaborative
aspect of Digital Humanities projects—where meaning
A. Ciula et al.
324 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
is under continuous negotiation and partial formali-
zation—is taken into account.
8 For a similar approach see Eide and Ore (2006), and
Ore (forthcoming).
9 Note that the model does not claim to be a complete
formalization of all ‘exhibitions’ and assertions in the
text. Indeed, some choices—largely driven not only by
the research interests of the project team, but also by
pragmatic reasons—had to be made on what to model
and what not to model explicitly. Eide (2008) with
respect to the modelling of naming events within
CIDOC-CRM: ‘In CIDOC-CRM, the modelling of
entities we presume to exist without knowing who
or what they are is quite possible. And there will
always be things we do not know when we read his-
torical texts. What may be a problem is that the
naming event we model in this way is an event that
is not documented in the text we are basing the model
upon. Whether this is acceptable or not is a decision
one has to make when building up these kinds of
models.’ (Eide, 2008, p. 33).
10 For more details on this see the initial report by Vieira
and Ciula (2007).
11 For an overview on these vocabularies see, respec-
tively: http://cidoc.ics.forth.gr/ (accessed August
2008); http://dublincore.org/ (accessed August 2008);
http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/ (accessed August
2008); http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/ (accessed
August 2008); http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-time/
(accessed August 2008).
12 In England, hundred and wapentake (in northern
counties) are administrative and judicial subdivisions
of Saxon origins within each county or shire. In the
thirteenth century each had numerous officials and a
court where the business of the hundred/wapentake
would be done, people tried and judged, and taxes
levied and collected.
13 Note that the editors have decided not to encode these
occurrences as relevant editorial interventions.
Therefore the TEI recommendations to represent pri-
mary sources with this respect have not been applied.
14 Jambalaya is a plug-in developed at the University of
Victoria, BC, Canada, for visualizing data modelling
within Prote´ge´-OWL: http://www.thechiselgroup.org/
jambalaya (accessed August 2008).
15 Prote´ge´-OWL is downloadable at http://protege.
stanford.edu/ (accessed August 2008). For a tutorial
see Horridge et al. (2004).
16 It has to be noted that the layout of the web indexes
compared to the print indexes does not vary as much
as it could have done. Indeed, although at the time of
writing the project team had agreed that a more subtle
exploitation of the different media should be achieved
before the publication of the third volume of the
calendar, the switching of editorial paradigms between
the two media requires a flexible approach in defining
editorial strategies that is certainly favoured by
the technologies but which involves some careful
re-thinking of well-established editorial practices and
conventions.
17 See http://www.cch.kcl.ac.uk/xmod/ (accessed August
2008); see also Spence and Vetch (2004).
18 See http://cocoon.apache.org/ (accessed August 2008).
19 The transformation language XSL-FO drives the pro-
cessor Apache FOP—see http://xmlgraphics.apache.
org/fop/ (accessed August 2008)—to produce the
indexes according to the print specifications defined
together with the publisher Boydell & Brewer.
20 We are currently in the process of refining the inte-
gration between print and web output. For an intro-
duction on how the first print volume of the fine rolls
was produced see Ciula, A., Short, H. and Spence, P.
Technical Introduction (Dryburgh et al., 2007,
pp. xlix–lix).
21 The search facility currently accessible on the project
website will be enriched further beyond the combina-
tion of queries for authorities and date, so as to exploit
the complex model embedded in the ontology to
the full. See http://www.cch.kcl.ac.uk/ereuna/
(accessed August 2008).
22 See http://lucene.apache.org/java/docs/ (accessed
August 2008).
23 The personnel and credits page for the project is
http://www.frh3.org.uk/cocoon/frh3/content/about/
personnel.html (accessed August 2008).
The Henry III Fine Rolls Project
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 325
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
