
1 Introduction
1.1 Traditional analysis and
phylogenetic analysis
The principle of reconstructing the transmission
history of a manuscript tradition of a text by
analysing common errors and other textual altera-
tions to establish relationships between extant
manuscripts was formulated in the nineteenth cen-
tury and has been standard practice for scholars
working on medieval texts for well over 100 years
(Timpanaro, 1985; Salemans, 2000). This approach
Correspondence:
H. F. Windram, Department
of Biochemistry, University
of Cambridge, Tennis
Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QW, UK.
E-mail:
h.f.windram@btinternet.com
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
443
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn023 Advance Access Published on 3 October 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
has produced critical editions of outstanding dis-
tinction in many languages, including those of
Dante’s Divine Comedy by Petrocchi (1966–67)
and Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales by Manly and
Rickert (1940). These traditional stemmatological
methods were tested in a study by Hiram Peri
(Pflaum) (1956), where they were successfully used
to analyse an ‘artificial’ tradition (where present-day
scribes copied a text, and the copying history
was known).
There are many similarities between the inheri-
tance and accumulation of scribal alterations
through successive generations of copying, and the
inheritance and accumulation of genetic mutations
in molecules of DNA through successive generations
of living organisms. In both cases, a string of infor-
mation (words in the case of a manuscript, or
nucleotides—the repeating chemical units that
make up the molecule—in the case of DNA) is
copied reasonably accurately, resulting in two
copies of the same string of information. However,
in both cases, changes can occur, resulting in altera-
tions to the text or mutations in the DNA. Many
common types of textual change have parallels in
DNA mutations. Substitution of one word for
another is analogous to the substitution of a nucleo-
tide. Similarly, insertion or omission of words is
analogous to the insertion or deletion of nucleotides.
A scribe using more than one exemplar while
copying a text creates a hybrid ‘contaminated’
text, which may either contain sections from each
exemplar used, or incorporate individual readings
from a second copy into the original base text.
This has parallels with genetic recombination,
where related DNA molecules produce a hybrid,
or lateral gene transfer, where DNA is exchanged
between distantly related organisms (Barbrook
et al., 1998; Howe et al., 2001; Windram et al.,
2005).
The similarities between textual transmission and
biological inheritance have been utilized in many
studies, where phylogenetic techniques developed
in evolutionary biology have been applied to textual
traditions. (e.g. Platnick and Cameron, 1977; Lee,
1989; Robinson and O’Hara, 1996; Barbrook et al.,
1998; Salemans, 2000; Stolz, 2003; Lantin et al.,
2004). The availability of methods and computer
programs from evolutionary biology that can
handle large amounts of data (see Page and
Holmes, 1998 for an overview of many commonly
used methods) makes their application potentially
very powerful.
However, this approach to textual studies has
attracted opposition from some scholars who
argue that it is not possible to make any attempt
to understand the true relationships between manu-
scripts without a deep understanding of the text and
context of the work (e.g. Hanna, 2000; Cartlidge,
2001). A realistic position is probably that these
phylogenetic methods offer a valid approach to
manuscript analysis, but that their real value
comes in their power to assist the textual scholar
rather than to attempt to replace the scholar’s
expertise. Once the initial coding of texts into a
form that can be handled by the computer programs
has been completed, phylogenetic methods offer
an extremely rapid insight into the transmission
history of the text. They allow the researcher to
study in a few minutes the effects of, for example,
including only certain sections of the text in an
analysis, or omitting certain manuscripts.
Our early studies with a variety of traditions,
both artificial (Spencer et al., 2004; Baret et al.,
2006) and genuine (Mooney et al., 2001; Windram
et al., 2005; Eagleton and Spencer, 2006) showed
that phylogenetic methods supported the results
of traditional analysis. However, these test studies
generally used texts that were rather short or had
a simple copying history. In order to test the
applicability of phylogenetic methods to longer
texts, with a more complex copying history, we
used the methods to analyse a well-studied longer
text, Dante’s Monarchia, which, excluding notes and
apparatus, runs to some fifty pages in the printed
version.
The phylogenetic analysis was done ‘blind’ by
two of us (H.F.W. and C.J.H.) who did not know
the identity of the text, but just worked from the
variant list and coded matrix prepared by the textual
specialists in the team. This ensured that the initial
interpretation of the results and the identification of
features of interest within the tradition could not
have been influenced by prior knowledge. We then
combined all members of the team and compared
H. F. Windram et al.
444 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the results of the computer analyses with those of
more traditional textual scholarship using recent
publications (Shaw, 1995, 2006).
1.2 The Monarchia tradition
Dante’s Monarchia is a treatise on political theory
written in medieval Latin in the early fourteenth
century. It comprises three books which address
specific questions central to Dante’s vision of the
role of the Monarchy, or universal empire, in the
way human society should ideally be ordered. Book
I considers whether monarchy in this sense is neces-
sary to the well-being of the world. Humanity as a
whole has a purpose and therefore needs an overall
leader, a single sovereign authority (Monarch) set
over all lesser rulers. Book II tackles the question of
whether the Roman people took on this role by right
due to their nobility and inherent superiority as
a race. Dante uses poetic testimony from classical
literature to support his case, giving an episodic
view of Roman history rather than a chronological
historical account. In Book III, he considers whether
the monarch derives his authority directly from
God, or indirectly from the Pope. He uses argu-
ments based on the scriptures and historical evi-
dence to argue against the primacy of papal
authority, concluding that there is a direct line of
authority from God to the Monarch (Shaw, 1995).
This work survives in twenty-one witnesses
dating from the fourteenth century to the eighteenth
century, one of these being the editio princeps of
1559, which is not copied from any extant manu-
script, and which is accorded manuscript status.
Over the last 150 years there has been a continuing
history of scholarly analysis of the Monarchia tradi-
tion reflected in the publication of four influential
editions, those of Witte (1874), Bertalot (1918),
Rostagno (1st edn 1921; 2nd edn, 1960) and Ricci
(1965) (see Appendix I for full details). The last of
these is the Edizione Nazionale published to coin-
cide with the 700th anniversary of Dante’s birth
in 1265. More recently, Shaw has published two
editions of Monarchia, one in standard book
format (1995) and the other as a DVD-ROM
(2006). Shaw’s critical text will replace Ricci’s as
the Edizione Nazionale of the Societa` Dantesca
Italiana, in a volume which is forthcoming.
2 Methods
2.1 Encoding of text for phylogenetic
analyses
Data from the transcripts of each witness were con-
verted into a matrix, or NEXUS file (Maddison
et al., 1997), by encoding the texts as symbols.
If several witnesses agreed on a reading at a partic-
ular site, they were given the same symbol at that
location, while each alternative reading was coded
with a different symbol. When text is missing at
a particular location, there are two ways of encoding
this. It can be treated as a number of independent
omissions with each character (e.g. word) encoded
separately as an omission, or it can be treated as
a single insertion or omission. The occurrence of
significant omissions is often important for estab-
lishing relationships between texts (‘il principe degli
errori’, Gianfranco Contini, 1986). However, if each
word in a region of omitted text is coded indepen-
dently as a separate event, then undue significance
may be given to the omission which, in reality,
usually represents a single event e.g. an eye-skip
between two occurrences of the same word.
NEXUS files were prepared in accordance with
both strategies.
In this study, the analysis was carried out initially
using a NEXUS file encoded under the first
approach, and was then repeated using a NEXUS
file in which insertions or omissions were encoded
as single events. In this instance, there was no sig-
nificant difference between the conclusions from the
two analyses; the results presented here are from the
second analysis. The NEXUS file was analysed using
a range of methods.
2.2 Phylogenetic methods involving
all of the manuscripts
2.2.1 Maximum parsimony
The maximum parsimony method considers all
possible bifurcating trees and identifies the one
that requires the smallest number of changes
(i.e. is most parsimonious). The various species, or
manuscripts, are in this way grouped according
to their shared derived characters. Not all sites are
informative for maximum parsimony analysis.
A parsimony informative site is one where there is
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 445
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
more than one variant recorded, and where at least
two variants are each recorded at least twice.
All other sites are considered parsimony uninforma-
tive and are ignored by the analysis. Maximum
parsimony analysis was carried out using PAUP
(Swofford, 2001). Trees generated using different
sections of the text were compared to identify wit-
nesses whose position varied according to the sec-
tion used, and whose exemplar might therefore have
changed during the copying process.
Bootstrapping was used to give a measure of the
statistical support for a tree structure generated by
maximum parsimony (Felsenstein, 1985). This tech-
nique uses a large number of replicate data sets,
generated from the original data set by sampling a
set of sites at random (and with replacement) from
the original data set. A phylogenetic tree is gener-
ated individually for each data set and the results are
then represented as a consensus tree which shows
only manuscript groupings supported by a chosen
percentage of the individual trees. In this study,
1,000 replicate data sets were analysed, and the
consensus tree showed only those groupings sup-
ported by at least 50% of the individual trees.
The bootstrap support values are shown on the
maximum parsimony trees and indicate the percen-
tage of the individual trees supporting that particu-
lar grouping.
It is important to note that bootstrapping
indicates how certain we are about the estimate
of phylogeny from a given method, but not
whether that estimate is actually correct. A boot-
strap support value of 100% for a particular group-
ing tells us that adding more data is unlikely to
change our opinion about the grouping. However,
if the method is in some way inappropriate, it is
possible to get 100% bootstrap support for incorrect
groupings.
2.2.2 NeighborNet
The NeighborNet method (Bryant and Moulton,
2002, 2004) represents the relationships between
species, or manuscripts (Spencer et al., 2004), as
a network rather than as a simple branching tree,
thus enabling multiple affiliations to be represented.
The distance between pairs of manuscripts is calcu-
lated as the total number of differences between
them. The closest pairs of manuscripts, and pairs
of pairs etc., are then grouped and when a
member of one pair has been chosen as a member
of a second pair, then both pairs are replaced with a
pair of linked hypothetical ancestors to give an over-
all network showing the relationships between the
various manuscripts. The analyses were performed
using the SplitsTree4 package v 4.3 (Huson and
Bryant, 2006).
2.2.3 Supernetwork analysis
The Supernetwork algorithm (Huson et al., 2004)
forms part of the SplitsTree4 package (Huson, 1998;
Huson and Bryant, 2006). For this analysis the input
data are the trees produced by other phylogenetic
methods such as maximum parsimony. Information
present in the topologies of individual trees (e.g. the
tree for one gene or, in the case of Monarchia, for an
individual book) is used to generate an overall tree
or network that gives the best representation of the
relationships between individual species or, in this
case, manuscripts. The resultant network enables
conflicts between the input trees to be visualized.
One advantage of this method is that the input
trees do not all need to contain exactly the same
set of species or manuscripts, although the accuracy
of the results may be weakened if many of the spe-
cies or manuscripts are not common to all of the
input trees.
The trees produced by all of these phylogenetic
analyses show the relationships between the manu-
scripts according to the assumptions of each
method. All of the trees are unrooted and give no
indication of the origin of the tradition, which can
best be established by textual analysis. It should be
noted that, as with the analysis of biological data,
the results are not affected by instances
of convergent variation (also known as polygenetic
variation), where scribes may make similar
changes independently. This type of change tends
to be distributed randomly throughout the manu-
scripts and gives no statistically significant bias
to the results. Indeed, one of the main benefits
of a numerical analysis is that it avoids giving
undue significance to this type of unsystematic
error.
H. F. Windram et al.
446 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
2.3 Methods involving pairs of
manuscripts
2.3.1 Maximum chi-squared analysis
This method is based on the chi-squared method
developed by Maynard Smith for the detection of
recombination in pairs of DNA sequences (Maynard
Smith, 1992). For each selected pair of manuscripts,
the program compares the data at each character
number in the two rows of the NEXUS matrix
that correspond to the chosen manuscripts
(Windram et al., 2005). It creates a linear sequence
of differences indicating whether the two manu-
scripts being compared are the same or different
at each location in the NEXUS file. If the two manu-
scripts are similarly related throughout, then on
average, any differences between them should be
evenly spaced along the length of the sequence.
However, if, for example, the two sequences are
very closely related, but only in the second half,
then the differences would tend to occur predomi-
nantly in the first half. The method moves an ima-
ginary breakpoint along the sequence of differences,
and at each point calculates a chi-squared value
which represents the difference between the
observed number of differences on either side of
the breakpoint and the expected number of differ-
ences in the absence of any recombination (i.e. if the
differences are evenly distributed, see Fig. 1). The
result is a graph showing the chi-squared value
(vertical axis) for each position of the window
(horizontal axis). The maximum chi-squared value
occurs at the location where there is the greatest
discrepancy between the observed and the expected
number of differences, and this indicates the most
likely breakpoint or point of exemplar change
(Windram et al., 2005). A probability (P) value
can be assigned to the maximum chi-squared
measure, which indicates the chance of getting this
chi-squared value, or a larger one, in the absence
of recombination. Thus a lower probability value
indicates a more significant shift.
2.3.2 Distribution of differences
This analysis provides an indication of how different
two manuscripts are within a particular window.
A window of chosen size is moved along the same
sequence of differences as was used for the maxi-
mum chi-squared analysis. A window of 1,501 char-
acters proved optimal for the Monarchia data and
was used for all the analyses reported here. The
number of locations where a difference has been
recorded is calculated as a percentage of the total
number of locations in the window, and
this percentage of differences may then be plotted
against the character number at the mid-point of
the window. The resultant graph shows clearly
how the percentage of differences varies along the
length of the two sequences and whether the two
manuscripts become more or less similar after any
possible recombination point. The maximum chi-
squared program and the percentage of differences
program were both written and implemented in
Matlab (The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA).
3 Results
3.1 The complete tradition
The data for phylogenetic analysis consisted of a
21 witness 16,548 character matrix (the NEXUS
file). This divides into the three books as follows:
Book I NEXUS chrs 1–4,659¼ 4,659chr.
Book II NEXUS chrs 4,660–10,209¼ 5,550chr.
Book III NEXUS chrs 10,210–16,548¼ 6,339chr.
Some of the witnesses are incomplete. There are
many minor and several sizeable regions of missing
*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *                ***********
(i) (ii)
A
B
Fig. 1 The distribution of the differences (marked as
asterisks) between sequences A and B are compared by
moving an imaginary break point (solid arrows) along the
sequence of differences. In (i), the texts are similarly
related throughout and the observed number of differ-
ences at each point would equal the expected number of
differences (i.e. an even distribution of differences
throughout the text). In (ii), the texts are particularly
closely related in the second half and the maximum chi-
squared value would occur at the location (dotted arrow),
where there is the greatest discrepancy between the
observed distribution of differences and that expected
for sequences that are similarly related throughout
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 447
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
data, including several sections of thirty or more
characters in length (Table 1).
This NEXUS file was used for maximum parsi-
mony, NeighborNet, and Supernetwork analyses
using both the complete tradition and the individ-
ual books.
3.1.1 Maximum parsimony analysis
The maximum parsimony analysis of the complete
tradition (Fig. 2) was then compared with the rela-
tionships between witnesses established by tradi-
tional stemmatic analysis (Table 2). Ricci (1965)
suggested that the extant witnesses could be divided
into a two-branched stemma, with the majority
falling into the -group, while three witnesses,
including the editio princeps (K), formed a separate
-family. Shaw (2006) has shown that the tradition
may be better represented by a three-branched
stemma, with the editio princeps deriving from
the archetype independently of the -family manu-
scripts (A and T). It should be borne in mind that
Shaw’s analysis incorporates two manuscripts, U
and Ph, which were unknown to Ricci (Shaw, 1996).
The evolutionary tree produced by maximum
parsimony strongly resembles the stemma con-
structed by Shaw (Appendix II). Traditional analysis
has shown that the -manuscripts divide into four
subgroups, termed 1–4, with A shifting from the
-family to the 3-group for the second half of the
text. The two halves of manuscript A are referred to
as A1 and A2. The main groupings of the traditional
analysis were retained in well-supported groups in
the maximum parsimony analysis. As a general
guide, groupings in biological analyses are consid-
ered to be well supported if they have bootstrap
support values of more than 70% (Hillis and
Bull, 1993). Manuscript A grouped clearly with T
(97% bootstrap support) when the complete data
set was analysed. The 1- and the 2-manuscripts
had 100% support for all their groups. The paired
manuscripts in the 3- and 4- groups all had 100%
support, but the grouping of these pairs was less
reliable, especially the grouping of G/D with Ph/V
which was very uncertain, having only 54% support.
The E/R pair was not linked to the other 3-texts.
3.1.2 NeighborNet analysis
The NeighborNet results (Fig. 3) were largely in
agreement with the maximum parsimony results
and the traditional analysis.
The 1- and 2-groups were clearly defined.
The 3-texts Ph, V, E, and R were grouped together,
but the G/D pair grouped separately from the other
3-manuscripts and showed linkage with S/M.
Manuscripts G, D, S, and M all had long-branch
lengths, indicating that each contains many unique
variants. This linkage of S/M and D/G also dis-
rupted the 4-group, with just C, H, and Z group-
ing together. Manuscript A was linked with T,
which shows some slight affiliation (indicated by
a reticulation) to K.
The E/R pair was typical of a grouping where one
text (in this case R) has been copied directly from
the other (E). In such cases, the exemplar typically
has a very short individual branch away from its
copy, and forms an almost internal node within
the tree (Spencer et al., 2004; Baret et al., 2006).
Thus E and R formed a very narrow network that
Table 1 The location and explanation for sections of data
of thirty or more characters missing from the Monarchia
tradition
Witness Region(s) missing
(Chr. No. in
NEXUS file)
Reason
Q 3,680–16,548 Only the first gathering of the
witness survives
P 9,031–9,777 A folio has gone missing from the
exemplar from which P was
copied
R 13,316–13,663
14,028–16,548
The witness is missing its last few
pages and an isolated page near
the end
A 5,728–5,791
5,868–5,912
The missing text consists of two
lengthy quotations omitted by
the scribe
T 5,728–5,791
5,868–5,912
The missing text consists of two
lengthy quotations omitted by
the scribe
C 14,908–15,814 A folio is missing near the end of
the text
Z 8,951–8,990 Omission of five lines due to eye-
skip by the scribe
H. F. Windram et al.
448 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
appeared more as a forked branch. The copy, R, not
only contains almost all of the error variants present
in the exemplar, E, but also contains its own collec-
tion of unique errors. In contrast, the manuscript
pairs F/N and H/Z were typical of manuscripts
copied independently from a common exemplar.
They each formed a tight pair, as they have many
variants in common, but the individual manuscripts
Fig. 2 A maximum parsimony tree of the complete Monarchia data set. The phylogenetic trees in this article are all
unrooted, and so give no indication of the origin of the tradition. The tree is a bootstrap consensus tree using 1,000
replicate data sets, and shows groupings that are supported by at least 50% of the individual trees. Each branch is
labelled with its bootstrap support percentage. The horizontal branch lengths are proportional to the number
of substitutions inferred. The figure also shows the traditional grouping of the witnesses into groups 1–4 and
non--manuscripts
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 449
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
each contain independent errors found uniquely in
that witness. Some scribes introduce more errors/
variants than others (e.g. manuscript Z contains
more unique variants than manuscript H), but the
branch length of H indicates that it was not a direct
exemplar for Z.
Sometimes a branch length can be apparently
misleading, for example if large sections of one
manuscript are missing. Q is known from traditional
analysis to be copied directly from L, but although
the two manuscripts group together, L has a longer
branch length than one might expect for the exem-
plar. However, manuscript Q consists only of part of
the first book and is missing from chr 3,681–16,548,
including all of Book II and Book III. L can then be
compared only with the remaining manuscripts, and
so has many more unique variants, and a longer
branch length. It is likely that most of these
variants would also have been found in the remain-
der of Q. A comparison of the results of the
traditional analysis and of the phylogenetic
analysis for each manuscript group is summarized
in Table 3.
3.2 The individual books
3.2.1 Phylogenetic analyses
The data file was split and each book examined
separately to identify manuscripts whose affiliation
Table 2 The manuscript groups of the Monarchia
tradition according to traditional analysis
Manuscript group Manuscripts in group
Editio princeps
(non--witness)a
K
Non--manuscriptsa A1, T
1 B, L, Q
2 P, F, N
3 Ph, V, E, R, G, A2þD (contaminated)
4 C, H, Z, M, SþU (contaminated)
aManuscripts A1, T form the -group (Shaw, 2006). Earlier
analysis (Ricci, 1965) also included K in the -group.
Fig. 3 The NeighborNet graph of the complete Monarchia data set. The edge lengths are proportional to the number of
differences between manuscripts (expressed in the scale bar as the mean character difference)
H. F. Windram et al.
450 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
shifted between books. The maximum parsimony
results for each of the books are shown in Fig. 4.
Manuscript Q does not include Book II or Book III,
and contains only part of Book I. The manuscript
groupings are still largely retained in the individual
books, but there are some minor differences. For
example in the complete tradition, manuscript C
grouped with the M, S, H, and Z manuscripts
with a fairly low level of support, and this grouping
was retained only in Books II and III. However,
a clear shift was identified with manuscript A
which grouped strongly with T (100% support) in
Book I, weakly with T (58% support) in Book II,
and with E, R (78% support) in Book III. Although
there was some support for an A/T/K group (70%)
in the complete tradition, the A/T/K grouping was
Table 3 A comparison of the results of traditional and phylogenetic analysis of the various manuscript groups of
the Monarchia tradition
Traditional analysis Phylogenetic analysis
The non-b-manuscripts—K, T, and A1
T and A1 are closely related.
K is separate from the T, A1 group (Shaw, 1996)
T and A form a networked group with 97% support. K groups
with T, A with 70% support.
The b1 manuscripts—B, L, and Q
Manuscripts B, L, and Q form a subgroup, with L and Q being
closer to each other than to B. Manuscript Q is copied from L.
Many of the individual readings in Q correspond to character-
istics of L (e.g. abbreviations or corrections) not understood by
the scribe of Q.
Manuscripts L, Q and B, L, Q group with 100% support.
L and Q are closer to each other than to B. Q has a longer
branch length than L reflecting its greater number of unique
readings.
The b2 manuscripts—P, F, and N
Manuscripts P, F, and N form a related group.
F and N share a common ancestor.
N is older than F, but F cannot be a direct copy of N, because
there are some omissions in N that do not occur in F.
Manuscripts F, N and P, F, N group with 100% support.
F and N are closer to each other than to P. The branch lengths
for F and N are similar, supporting the view that neither is
directly copied from the other.
The b3 manuscripts—Ph, V, E, R, G, and A2
Manuscripts Ph and V are closely related, sharing a common
ancestor. They share errors and omissions with the other 3
manuscripts.
R is believed to be copied from E.
Manuscript A2 is a member of the 3 group.
Manuscripts Ph and V group together (with 100% support).
In the NeighborNet analysis, G shows linkage with D.
Manuscripts E and R group with 100% support.
R branches off from the E branch and has a longer branch
length, supporting the idea of it being copied directly from
E. It contains almost all of E’s errors and others of its own.
For A2 affiliation see later results.
The b4 manuscripts—C, H, Z, M, and S
Manuscripts S and M are closely related.
C generally shows similarities with S and M.
H and Z share a common ancestry, but their pattern of variants
shows that they are not copied one from the other.
Manuscripts S and M group together (100% support).
NeighborNet analysis grouped C with H, Z.
Maximum parsimony analysis grouped C first with S, M, and
then with the H, Z pair.
H and Z group together (100% support). Their branch lengths
indicate that neither is copied directly from the other.
Z contains more unique variants.
The Contaminated manuscripts—D and U
Manuscripts D and U do not fit neatly into any of the
groupings.
D contains features of 3- and 4-manuscripts. It has links to
both M and G.
U is a -manuscript (mainly 4), but it shares some significant
good readings with K and T, where the -manuscripts are
corrupt. The scribe either copied from a contaminated exem-
plar, or contaminated as he copied.
Manuscripts G, D and manuscripts S, M occur as two pairs
(each with 100% support). The NNet analysis shows some
linkage between the two pairs, especially between D and M.
Manuscript U does not appear to link closely with any of the
manuscript groups.
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 451
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
not supported in any of the individual books, but
there was strong support (98%) for a T/K pair once
the A manuscript had moved away towards E/R.
The exact relationship between K and T is indicated
by traditional textual analysis, which indicates that
the grouping of K and T in Book III is caused by
both texts being far more accurate than all other
extant texts in Book III, whilst not necessarily indi-
cating that they are both derived from a common
ancestor other than the archetype of the complete
tradition. The strong linkage of T with A in Book I
and then with K in Book III may result in the A/T/K
group seen in the complete data.
The dual affiliation of manuscript A could
also be seen in the overall supernetwork analysis
of the three individual maximum parsimony
trees (Fig. 5). Manuscript A occurred between,
and linked to, both manuscript T and the E/R
manuscript pair.
Overall, the phylogenetic analyses gave support
to the witness affiliations that have been deter-
mined by traditional analysis. In addition to deter-
mining the main manuscript groups, it suggested
that manuscript A shifts its affiliation from
the non--manuscript T, in the first half, to the
3-manuscripts, especially E/R, in the second half
of the text.
3.2.2 Further analyses of selected manuscripts
The maximum chi-squared and percentage differ-
ences analyses were used to investigate chosen
pairs of manuscripts. By detecting possible ‘recom-
bination’ break points, the maximum chi-squared
analysis can reveal likely instances of exemplar
change, while the percentage of differences plot
indicates whether the two manuscripts become
more similar or more different after a possible
break point, and gives a profile of the level of simi-
larity between the two manuscripts throughout
the data file. For technical reasons, the probability
values required for statistical significance are higher
when considering specific manuscripts (selected
because they appear to shift their affiliation
throughout the text) than for purely exploratory
analyses which may be made between any pair of
manuscripts. The significance thresholds that apply
to the probability (P) values were calculated using
the Dunn–Sidak correction for multiple testing
(Sokal and Rohlf, 1995, p. 239). Note that only
probability values that are smaller than the
Fig. 4 The maximum parsimony trees for Book I (chr 1–4,659), Book II (chr 4,660–10,209), and Book III
(chr 10,210–16,548) of Monarchia
H. F. Windram et al.
452 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
significance threshold are statistically significant.
The analyses of manuscripts using the maximum
chi-squared and percentage differences methods
were again compared with the results of traditional
studies.
3.2.2.1 Manuscripts A and E. Manuscript A was
the only manuscript to show a clear shift of affilia-
tion in the phylogenetic analyses of the individual
books. The results of the maximum chi-squared
and percentage difference analyses are shown
in Fig. 6. For this analysis, the significance threshold
value¼ 1.2 103. The maximum chi-squared
value for the comparison of A and E was 45.1,
occurring at character number 10,011 in the
NEXUS file. The P value of 8.25 107 was much
smaller than the significance threshold of
1.2 103. This result could certainly be consistent
with a change of exemplar occurring within Book II.
Manuscript A becomes increasingly similar to
manuscript E, with Book III being more similar
than Book I. The highest percentage of differences
Fig. 5 The Supernetwork graph of the individual maximum parsimony trees for Books I, II, and III. Branch lengths are
proportional to the mean number of substitutions inferred
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 453
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
between manuscripts A and E occurs in Book II.
A comparison between the results of traditional
analysis and the results from these programs is
shown in Table 4. There is good agreement, although
the traditional analysis identified a change of exem-
plar somewhat earlier in Book II (chr 8,090—Book II
vii 8) than did the computer analyses (chr 10,011—
Book II xi 6). There are two likely reasons for this.
First, the maximum chi-squared peak in this analysis
was broad, and flanked by lesser peaks of almost the
same height, making it hard to locate the breakpoint
exactly. Second, the computer analysis looks at
the data purely numerically, but makes no textual
judgement. The analysis can speedily point to an
area of interest, but the exact location of a break
may need to be refined by textual analysis of
Fig. 6 Plot of chi-squared values (a) and the percentage of differences (b) against the location in the text for the
manuscripts A and E. In the chi-squared chart, the highest peak occurs at the location most likely to be the site
of manuscript recombination. The maximum chi-squared value¼ 45.1 at character number 10,011; P¼ 8.25 107.
The distribution of differences chart shows the percentage of differences in the region of coded text contained in
a moving window (of 1,501 characters) against the character number at the mid-point of the window
Table 4 A comparison of the results of traditional and computer-based analysis of manuscripts A and E
Traditional Analysis Maximum chi-squared and percentage of differences
Initially manuscript A groups with the non--manuscripts.
A shares a common exemplar with manuscript T up to Book
(Section) II chapter vii para 8.
e.g.
In para 4 (NEXUS chr 7941)
‘sacris’ in A1, K and T
‘sanctis’ in -mss
Then in para 8 (NEXUS chr 8090)
‘qui’ in T and K
‘quod’ in A2 and -mss
And in para 8 (NEXUS chr 8102)
‘ut’ in T and K
‘quod’ in A2 and -mss
These, and other examples, confirm that A shifts affiliation to
the -manuscripts. It is particularly close to the 3-texts.
The shift of manuscript A from the non--manuscripts to
the 3-manuscripts (especially E) prompted the analysis.
The chi-squared analysis gave a statistically significant
(although broad) peak indicating a possible break point at
chr 10,011.
The manuscripts became increasingly similar from part way
through Book II.
H. F. Windram et al.
454 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
individual variants. However, the combined results
of the computer programs have enabled the recogni-
tion of a possible exemplar change, the identification
of the affiliations both before and after the break-
point, and its approximate location.
3.2.3 Exploratory analyses of other manuscripts
Manuscript A was the only manuscript that shifted
its affiliation in the phylogenetic analyses. Explora-
tory analyses were carried out with other manu-
scripts, but these are only considered significant if
the P-value is smaller than a lower threshold value
determined on the basis of a possible full pair-wise
comparison of each manuscript with all other
manuscripts. In this case, with twenty-one manu-
scripts, a full pair-wise comparison would have
a significance threshold of 2.4 104.
Various pairs of manuscripts from throughout
the tradition were compared.
3.2.3.1 Manuscript B and the editio princeps,
K. The results are shown in Fig. 7a of a comparison
involving the important witnesses B and K.
Manuscript B is a fourteenth century copy, the
Codex Bini, and K is the editio princeps of 1559.
There is a large peak in the percentage of differences
occurring in Book II. This peak of differences in
Book II was found in almost all pair-wise
Fig. 7 Plot of chi-squared values and the percentage of differences (window size 1,501 characters) for pair-wise
comparison of selected witnesses. (a) B/K—maximum chi-squared value¼ 39.44 at character number 5,347;
P¼ 7.88 104 and (b) H/Z—maximum chi-squared value¼ 19.54 at character number 3,670; P¼ 2.80 102
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 455
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
comparisons throughout the tradition, giving rise
to a maximum chi-squared peak in the region of
characters 4,000–6,000. There was also a general
tendency for Book I to be the region of greatest
similarity.
3.2.3.2 Manuscripts H and Z. The results for the
manuscripts H and Z are shown in Fig. 7b. These
two manuscripts grouped together with 100%
support in the phylogenetic analyses of both the
complete tradition and the individual books. The
percentage of differences is approximately doubled
in Book II, although it did not cause the manu-
scripts to re-group.
Book II of Monarchia differs from both Books I
and III, in that its account of Roman history is
backed by poetic testimony involving a large
number of quotations. These quotations are written
in classical Latin, rather than the more familiar
medieval Latin of the rest of the text, and often
proved difficult for the scribes to copy accurately
(Shaw, in press). The quotations, and the prose
text which surrounds them, also contain many
names. Although simple spelling variants were
removed during the collation and regularization of
the files, there were still many aberrant versions of
some names, too idiosyncratic to be regarded as
simple spelling variants, and this gave rise to a far
higher observed error rate in this region of the text.
Manuscripts H and Z form a close and constant
pair, and so there was no reason to expect that they
would differ greatly in all of the embedded quota-
tions, but several of them in regions of generally
high variability were examined. Tables 5 and 6
shows the results for two quotations. The Latin
texts and translations are taken from the DVD-
ROM (Shaw, 2006) and the numbers represent the
number of versions of that word as it occurs in the
NEXUS file. The ‘þ’ sign indicates locations where
manuscripts H and Z differ from each other. The
first quotation (Table 5) is taken from Lucan’s
Pharsalia, and occurs in Book II chapter iv para-
graph 6. The second (Table 6) is taken from
Cicero’s De Officiis and occurs in Book II chapter
vii paragraph 12. A comparison of the proportion
of sites that are different between manuscripts H
and Z in the selected quotations, and in each book
as a whole, is shown in Table 7. In this table, the
number of differences is expressed as a fraction of
Table 5 Number of variant forms occurring in the complete tradition in quotations
from Pharsalia found in Book II
Total number of variants in all manuscripts in a quotation from
Book II iv 6 showing locations where H and Z differ from each other (+) 
Illa profecto sacrifico cecidere Nume, que lecta iuventus patritia cervice movet;
  2        3            2          1          4                          11           4          2           5
            +            +                      +                                                                 +
spoliaverat hauster, aut boreas populos ancilia nostra ferentes. 
          3              2         1       4            2            4          2           1 
                                                                          + 
(Pharsalia ix, 477-80)
Translation - No doubt the shields,
Which chosen youths bore on patrician necks,
Fell before Numa as he sacrificed; 
The South wind or the North had robbed their bearers 
Of shields which now are ours. 
H. F. Windram et al.
456 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the number of variant locations present in both
manuscripts. Any missing words or phrases in
either manuscript reduce this total from the max-
imum number of characters for that book. The
results show that the two quotations have a higher
proportion of differences than the overall propor-
tion for each section, and that Book II, as a whole,
contains almost double the proportion of differ-
ences of either Book I or Book III. Overall, these
results, while only directly reflecting the situation
for manuscripts H and Z, are consistent with the
hypothesis that the quoted material in Book II is
the cause of the peak in the percentage of differences
plot noticed in almost all of the pair-wise compar-
isons of manuscripts.
In both the B/K and H/Z comparisons, the
P-values for the chi-squared peaks are above the
threshold value for statistical significance, and so
there is no indication of a shift in exemplar
throughout the text. This is in agreement with the
results of the phylogenetic analyses.
3.2.3.3 Manuscript S. There was some similarity
between the maximum chi-squared and the percen-
tage of differences plots for manuscripts S/M and
for manuscripts A/E. In both cases, the region of
greatest similarity occurred in Book III, and the
maximum chi-squared value occurred near the
start of Book III (Fig. 8). The P-value indicated
that the result for manuscripts S and M is statisti-
cally significant.
When a different witness, K, was compared
with S, a significant chi-squared peak also occurred
towards the end of the text and the two witnesses
were again closest in Book III. In contrast, a com-
parison of K with M gave very low chi-squared
values (results of K/M and K/S analyses not
shown). Manuscript S is a corrupt and degraded
manuscript and traditional analysis has been
divided in its view of the manuscript’s textual
Table 6 Number of variant forms occuring in the complete tradition in quotations
from De Officiis found in Book II
Total number of variants in all manuscripts in a quotation from 
Book II vii 12 showing locations where H and Z differ from each other (+)
Scite Crisippus, ut multa: ‘qui stadium’ inquit‘currit, eniti et contendere debet 
   4            3          1       1         1        2            1                13                     3           1 
                 +                                                                         +                                  
quam maxime possit ut vincat; supplantare eum quicum certet nullo modo debet’
                     5              2      3                2             3              13                  3               1 
                     +                     +                                                +                   +             
(De Officiis, III, 42)
Translation- With his customary aptness Chrysippus says: ‘When a
man races in the arena he must exert himself and strive his hardest to
win; he must not in any way obstruct his fellow-competitor.’ 
Table 7 A comparison of the proportion of differences
between manuscripts H and Z in all three books, and also
in two quotations found in Book II
Number of differences Proportion
Quotation 1 5/17 0.29
Quotation 2 6/18 0.33
Book I 201/4,558 0.04
Book II 390/5,437 0.07
Book III 305/6,240 0.05
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 457
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
history, and the results of the computer analyses are
also difficult to interpret. While the results of the
chi-squared analysis would be consistent with
manuscript S changing its exemplar to become
more similar to other witnesses in Book III, the
two manuscripts S and M formed a constant pair
in all of the phylogenetic analyses, with no apparent
shift of affiliation. Shaw (2006) has shown that S
was copied from only one exemplar.
3.2.3.4 Manuscript D. In the phylogenetic analy-
sis, manuscript D always grouped with G, and they
were loosely networked to the S/M pair. All four
manuscripts had long branch lengths (indicating a
large number of unique variants), and the S/M pair
grouped with the other 4-manuscripts C/H/Z in
the maximum parsimony analyses. This is consistent
with the results of the traditional analyses (Ricci,
1965; Shaw, 2006) which indicated that D was a
contaminated manuscript containing features of
the 3-group (mainly G) and the 4-group
(mainly M).
Several exploratory analyses were performed
using manuscript D, and two of the results are
shown in Fig. 9a and b. These analyses shared two
main features. First, the P-values were generally very
low, giving results that were highly statistically sig-
nificant. Second, the increase in differences usually
associated with Book II was present but peaked at
a higher character number than with many other
analyses. The maximum chi-squared value also
occurred at a consistently high character number,
usually between characters 6,000 and 7,000, and
some 1,500 characters after the start of Book II.
Traditional analysis (Shaw, 2006) revealed a pos-
sible explanation for the unusual results obtained
with manuscript D. A section of text spanning the
latter part of Book II and the first part of Book III—
f.41vb (Book II, chapter vi, line 2—NEXUS chr
7,455) to f.51r (Book III, chapter viii, line 5—
NEXUS chr 12,879) appears to be witten in a tighter
hand than the remaining text. This section of text
contains more errors and unusual readings than are
typical for the rest of the manuscript, and may be
the work of another scribe. The combination of the
normal increase in differences in Book II and the
scribal hand change in Book II/III, caused manu-
script D to move much more drastically away
from the other manuscripts, with the peak of differ-
ences and maximum chi-squared peak occurring
somewhat later than for many manuscript pairs.
4 Discussion
When the computer analyses were performed and
interpreted, the researchers did not have access to
any of the results of the traditional textual analysis
Fig. 8 Plot of chi-squared values and the percentage of differences (window size 1,501 characters) for pair-wise
comparison of manuscripts M and S. The maximum chi-squared value¼ 43.88 at character number 11,592;
P¼ 5.07 106
H. F. Windram et al.
458 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and had no knowledge of the identity of the text.
The data were supplied as a numerically coded table
of variants with no transcript material available.
While the list of variants supplied could have been
used to identify key words, no such attempts were
made. The numbering of the variant list indicated
that the text was divided into three sections and
these divisions were used to produce the sections
for analysis. It was later found that these sections
corresponded with the three books of Monarchia.
After the work was completed, the DVD-ROM
and Monarchia literature were consulted so that
the results of the computer analyses could be com-
pared with those of traditional scholarship.
4.1 Phylogenetic analysis of all texts
There was very good agreement between the max-
imum parsimony bootstrap tree and the traditional
stemma (Appendix II). The phylogenetic analyses
were able to identify not only all of the main manu-
script groups as determined by traditional analysis,
but also the subdivisions of these groups into
smaller subgroups and manuscript pairs. The phy-
logenetic methods predicted a shift in affiliation
(or possible change of exemplar) matching exactly
the conclusions of the traditional studies. The maxi-
mum parsimony results for the complete tradition
and for the individual books showed that manu-
script A appeared to shift affiliation from T to E/R
Fig. 9 Plot of chi-squared values and the percentage of differences (window size 1,501 characters) for pair-wise
comparisons involving manuscript D. (a) B/D—maximum chi-squared value¼ 104.83 at character number 6,100;
P¼ 2.21 1012 and (b) D/M—maximum chi-squared value¼ 47.27 at character number 6,885; P¼ 3.00 106
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 459
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
in the second book. This shift had also been appar-
ent from the traditional stemmatic analysis. It was
well documented, and had been noted as far back as
1965 (Ricci, 1965).
4.2 Pair-wise comparisons of witnesses
(a) The chi-squared and percentage differences
results indicated that the shift of manuscript
A from T to E/R occurred in Book II. The
computer programs were able to identify
the manuscripts involved in the shift of exem-
plar and to show the direction of the exemplar
change, and the approximate site of the shift,
although the predicted breakpoint occurred
somewhat later in the book than the break-
point indicated by traditional analysis. The
phylogenetic results must be interpreted in
the light of knowledge of the text in this
region. The exact location of the exemplar
change can be pin-pointed by detailed textual
analysis and understanding of the text.
(b) Many of the manuscript pairs were less simi-
lar in Book II than in either of the other
books. The content of Book II with its many
quotations written in the less familiar and
much more difficult classical Latin provides
an explanation for the increased level of dif-
ferences found in this region of the text.
(c) The chi-squared and percentage differences
results for S/M shared some features with
the A/E results in that, in both cases, the
manuscript pairs were at their most similar
in Book III, and a statistically significant max-
imum chi-squared value occurred either early
in Book III (S/M), or very near the end of
Book II (A/E). However, these results are dif-
ficult to interpret in the case of S/M as, unlike
the A/E pair, S/M formed a constant, well-
supported pair in all of the phylogenetic
analyses.
(d) Manuscript D appeared unusual, with its peak
of differences occurring generally later than
with other manuscript pairs. Manuscript D
showed the normal increased percentage of
differences at the start of Book II, but
superimposed on this, there is a section of
text spanning the latter part of Book II and
the first part of Book III, in which the hand-
writing suggests there may have been a change
of copyist. This section is noticeably more
error-prone than the rest of the text. These
two features explain the strong increase in
differences and high maximum chi-squared
peaks found in this region of the manuscript.
Manuscript D is a contaminated text sharing
material with the 3- and 4-manuscript
groups.
Overall, the results of the computer-based and
traditional methods are in good agreement with
each other. The computer analysis can be a very
useful tool for the rapid identification of possible
regions of interest, which can then be further exam-
ined by more traditional methods. The computer
methods are rapid and flexible, allowing a variety
of analyses to be performed from one data set,
and for specific variants or manuscripts to be
included or excluded from the analyses. They can
quickly assimilate a large amount of data and, even
when there are conflicting signals, can generate
a tree showing the relationships between the texts.
However, these trees are unrooted, and the origin of
the tradition can only be ascertained by textual ana-
lysis. Although the computer methods cannot make
any literary or textual judgement on the material,
they can work very efficiently in conjunction with
other methods to facilitate an understanding of
a textual tradition.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of the TEXTNET project, funded
by the Leverhulme Trust. The authors are grateful to
Matt Spencer, Adrian Barbrook, Barbara Bordalejo,
and Peter Lockhart for many helpful discussions
and suggestions.
Funding
The Leverhulme Trust
H. F. Windram et al.
460 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
References
Barbrook, A. C., Howe, C. J., Blake, N., and
Robinson, P. (1998). The phylogeny of The
Canterbury Tales. Nature, 394: 839.
Baret, Ph.V., Mace´, C., and Robinson, P. (2006). Testing
methods on an artificially created textual tradition. In
Mace´, C., Baret, Ph.V., Bozzi, A., and Cignoni, L. (eds),
The Evolution of Texts: Confronting Stemmatological and
Genetical Methods. Linguistica Computazionale, Vol.
XXIV–XXV. Pisa: Accademia editoriale, pp. 255–83.
Bryant, D. and Moulton, V. (2002). NeighborNet: an
agglomerative method for the construction of planar
phylogenetic networks. In Guigo, R. and Gusfield, D.
(eds), WABI 2002, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 2452. Berlin: Springer, pp. 375–391.
Bryant, D. and Moulton, V. (2004). Neighbor-Net: an
agglomerative method for the construction of phyloge-
netic networks. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 21(2):
255–65.
Cartlidge, N. (2001). The Canterbury Tales and cladistics.
Neuphilologische Mitteilungen, 102: 135–50.
Contini, G. (1986). Breviario di ecdotica. Milano: Napoli.
Eagleton, C. and Spencer, M. (2006). Copying and con-
flation in Geoffrey Chaucer’s treatise on the astrolabe: a
stemmatic analysis using phylogenetic software. Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science, 37(2): 237–68.
Felsenstein, J. (1985). Confidence limits on phyloge-
nies: an approach using the bootstrap. Evolution,
39: 783–91.
Hanna, R. (2000). The application of thought to
textual criticism in all modes - with apologies to
A. E. Housman. Studies in Bibliography, LIII: 163–72.
Hillis, D. M. and Bull, J. J. (1993). An empirical test
of bootstrapping as a method for assessing confi-
dence in phylogenetic analysis. Systematic Biology, 42:
182–92.
Howe, C. J., Barbrook, A. C., Spencer, M., Robinson, P.,
Bordalejo, B., and Mooney, L. R. (2001). Manuscript
evolution. Trends in Genetics, 17: 147–52.
Huson, D. (1998). SplitsTree: a program for analyzing
and visualizing evolutionary data. Bioinformatics, 14:
68–73.
Huson, D. H., Dezulian, T., Klopper, T., and Steel, M. A.
(2004). Phylogenetic super-networks from partial trees.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, 1: 151–58.
Huson, D. H. and Bryant, D. (2006). Application of
phylogenetic networks in evolutionary studies.
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 23(2): 254–67.
Lantin, A.-C., Baret, P. V., and Mace´, C. (2004).
Phylogenetic analysis of Gregory of Nazianzus’ Homily
27. In Purnelle, G., Fairon, C. and Dister, A. (eds),
Le poids des mots: Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on the Statistical Analysis of Textual Data.
Louvain-la-Neuve: Presses Universitaires de Louvain,
pp. 700–07.
Lee, A. R. (1989). Numerical taxonomy revisited: John
Griffith, cladistic analysis and St. Augustine’s
Quaestiones in Heptateuchem. Studia Patristica, 20:
24–32.
Maddison, D. R., Swofford, D. L., and Maddison, W. P.
(1997). NEXUS: An extensible file format for systematic
information. Systematic Biology, 46: 590–621.
Manly, J. M. and Rickert, E. (eds) (1940) The Text of the
Canterbury Tales: Studied on the Basis of All Known
Manuscripts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Maynard Smith, J. (1992). Analysing the mosaic structure
of genes. Journal of Molecular Evolution, 34: 126–29.
Mooney, L. R., Barbrook, A. C., Howe, C. J., and
Spencer, M. (2001). Stemmatic analysis of Lydgate’s
‘Kings of England’: a test case for the application of
software developed for evolutionary biology to manu-
script stemmatics. Revue d’Histoire des Textes, 31:
275–97.
Page, R. D. M. and Holmes, E. C. (1998). Molecular
Evolution. A Phylogenetic Approach. Oxford: Blackwell
Science Ltd.
Peri (Pflaum), H. (1956). Une me´thode expe´rimentale de
critique des textes. In Atti del VIII8 Congresso Interna-
zionale di Studi Romanzi, Vol. II, Florence: Sansoni.
Petrocchi, G. (1966–67). Dante Alighieri, La Commedia
secondo l’antica vulgata, edited by Giorgio Petrocchi,
4 vols. (Le opere di Dante Alighieri. Edizione
Nazionale a cura della Societa` Dantesca Italiana),
Verona: Mondadori.
Platnick, N. I. and Cameron, H. D. (1977). Cladistic
methods in textual, linguistic, and phylogenetic analy-
sis. Systematic Zoology, 26: 380–85.
Robinson, P. M. W. and O’Hara, R. J. (1996). Cladistic
analysis of an Old Norse manuscript tradition. In
Hockey, S. and Ide, N. (eds), Research in Humanities
Computing, Vol. 4. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 115–37.
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 461
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Salemans, B. J. P. (2000). Building Stemmas with the
Computer in a Cladistic, Neo-Lachmannian, Way.
Ph.D. thesis, Katholieke Universiteit Nijmegen.
Shaw, P. (1995). Dante, Alighieri: Monarchia. (Edited and
translated by P. Shaw) Cambridge Medieval Classics 4.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shaw, P. (1996). The stemma codicum of Dante’s
Monarchia. Italian Studies, LI: 5–26.
Shaw, P. (ed.) (2006). Dante Alighieri: Monarchia. An
electronic edition on DVD-Rom jointly published by
SDE-SDI (Scholarly Digital Editions and the Societa`
Dantesca Italiana), Leicester.
Shaw, P. (ed.) (in press). Dante Alighieri. Monarchia
(Edizione Nazionale delle opere di Dante Alighieri a
cura della Societa` Dantesca Italiana, vol. V/1),
Florence: Le Lettere.
Sokal, R. R. and Rohlf, F. J. (1995). Biometry. New York:
W.H. Freeman and Co.
Spencer, M., Davidson, E. A., Barbrook, A. C., and
Howe, C. J. (2004). Phylogenetics of artificial manu-
scripts. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 227: 503–11.
Stolz, M. (2003). New philology and new phylogeny:
aspects of a critical electronic edition of Wolfram’s
Parzival. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18: 139–50.
Swofford, D. L. (2001). PAUP. Phylogenetic Analysis
Using Parsimony (and other methods). Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer Associates.
Timpanaro, S. (1985 [1963]). La genesi del metodo del
Lachmann. Florence: Le Monnier, 1963. Revised edition
Padua: Liviana.
Windram, H. F., Howe, C. J., and Spencer, M. (2005).
The identification of exemplar change in the Wife of
Bath’s Prologue using the maximum chi-squared
method. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 20:
189–204.
Appendix I
Important critical editions of Monarchia
Dantis Alligherii de Monarchia libri III, codicum
manuscriptorum ope emendati per Carolum
Witte. Vindobonae 1874.
Dantis Alagherii De Monarchia libri III, recensuit
Ludovicus Bertalot. Friedrichsdorf in monte Tauno
apud Francofortum 1918; Gebennae 1920.
Alighieri, Dante. Monarchia, a cura di E. Rostagno
(in Le Opere di Dante. Testo critico della Societa`
Dantesca Italiana. Firenze 1921; second edition
1960).
Alighieri, Dante. Monarchia, a cura di Pier Giorgio
Ricci (Edizione Nazionale delle opere di Dante
Alighieri a cura della Societa` Dantesca Italiana,
vol. V). Milano 1965.
Alighieri, Dante. Monarchia. Edited and translated
by Prue Shaw. Cambridge 1995 (Cambridge
Medieval Classics 4).
Shaw, P. (ed.) (2006). Dante Alighieri: Monarchia.
An electronic edition on DVD-Rom jointly pub-
lished by SDE-SDI (Scholarly Digital Editions and
the Societa` Dantesca Italiana), Leicester.
Alighieri, Dante. Monarchia, edited by Prue Shaw
(Edizione Nazionale delle opere di Dante Alighieri
a cura della Societa` Dantesca Italiana, vol. V/1),
Florence (in press).
H. F. Windram et al.
462 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Appendix II
Traditional analysis of the Monarchia tradition
(Shaw, 2006) resulted in the following stemma
(Shaw, in press). Hypothetical ancestors are
represented as x1, x2, etc. There is some very
slight textual indication for a possible link between
2 and 3.
U—Manuscript U is contaminated with 1 and
non-.
Phylogenetic analysis of Dante’s Monarchia
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 4, 2008 463
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
