
1 Introduction
P. Cotte, a French linguist, remarks that the verb be
collocates with qualifying adjectives having a positive
or negative connotation (i.e. BE courageous, BE
cowardly) whereas the verb have is followed by nouns
expressing positive qualities1 only (i.e. HAVE courage
versus  HAVE cowardice).2 This HAVEþNoun
construction conveys a characterization of the
subject with nouns expressing modal qualities (e.g.
courage) which are focalized. Contrary to the usual
expression of possession in which the object refers to
an entity different from the subject, these qualities
are part and parcel of the subject referent. In this
construction, the verb HAVE seems to introduce
qualities that differentiate this referent of the subject
from other possible referents, including the speaker.
But it does not introduce his/her shortcomings
( HAVE cowardice), most probably because of an
empathy akin to that delineated in Boisson (1987).
The use of nouns preceded by a zero determiner to
express the qualities of the subject referent implies
that these characteristics can be shared by people
other than that referent.3
On the other hand, the verb BE can somehow
distance the speaker from the subject referent,
although it is usually held to express an identity
between the subject and its complement. This is
probably due to the fact that its history is linked
to deixis. The use of adjectives to express the
Correspondence:
Pierre Labrosse,
UFR d’anglais,
Universite´ de Paris IV –
Sorbonne, 1 rue Victor
Cousin, 75230 Paris
Cedex 05, France.
E-mail:
pierre.labrosse@club-
internet.fr
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm043 Advance Access Published on 20 November 2007
51
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
characteristics of the subject implies that these
characteristics apply to the subject referent only, not
to the speaker.
2 Does Have Collocate More
Frequently with Nouns
Expressing Qualities?
2.1 Hypotheses
P. Cotte advanced two hypotheses. The first hypoth-
esis adopted an onomasiologic (from mind to signs)
point of view: when a speaker wants to express
somebody’s quality/qualities, (s)he will use the
HAVEþ noun construction. The second, or cor-
rected hypothesis, took a semasiologic (from signs to
mind) point of view: the verb BE can be used to
express a person’s qualities or shortcomings. The
obvious consequence, from an onomasiologic point
of view, is that when a speaker wishes to express
somebody’s shortcoming(s), (s)he uses the verb BE.
I tested these hypotheses with the British
National Corpus World Edition December 2000
(hereafter BNC) for some of the qualities quoted by
P. Cotte, namely: beauty, courage, intelligence, and
patience.4 I have added two qualities taken from a
vocabulary list: compassion and tact.
2.2 Queries
Using SARA (the SGML Aware Retrieval
Application developed by T. Dodd for the BNC
project), I built queries combining various forms of
HAVEþ singular quality/shortcoming noun or
BEþ corresponding quality/shortcoming adjective
as listed in Table 1 subsequently.5
I accepted 3,910 hits: 85% for BE and 15% for
HAVE. These proportions are slightly different
from the proportions of BE and HAVE in the
BNC: out of a total of 4.8 million hits, BE represents
76% of hits and HAVE 24%. A certain number of
hits were rejected, but I did not keep count or a
record of those because I selected the acceptable hits
with the ‘thin’ option of SARA, an option which
erases the hits that do not meet the researcher’s
requirements.
2.3 Results: the 2-test
2.3.1 Individual comparison
I first used the 2 test to compare the number of hits
of HAVEþ noun with the number of hits of BEþ
adjective for a given characteristic. This resulted in a
table with two columns (HAVE or BE) and two rows
(quality or shortcoming) for each characteristic.
Such a table can be easily drawn on an EXCEL
spreadsheet, as exemplified in Table 2 subsequently.
If we accept a risk of error equal or inferior to 5%
(2¼ 3.841 in the above case), we find a significant
difference (with various risks of error) for all the
characteristics studied except tact/tactful versus
tactlessness/tactless, to which the 2-test cannot be
applied because the number of hits expected for
both characteristics with HAVE is lower than five.
2.3.2 General comparison
I then tried to use the 2-test to compare the
number of hits of HAVEþ noun and the number of
hits of BEþ adjective for all the characteristics
studied above. This yields a table with two columns
(HAVE or BE) and twelve rows (qualities
or shortcomings), but the test is not applicable
Table 1 Various forms of HAVE or BE and qualities or shortcomings investigated
HAVE forms Noun BE forms Adjectives
have VHB þ courage/cowardice am VBB þ courageous/cowardly
has VHZ þ patience/impatience are VBB þ patient/impatient
þ compassion/callousness is VBZ þ compassionate/callous
had VHD þ beauty/ugliness was VBD þ beautiful/ugly
þ intelligence/stupidity were VBD þ intelligent/stupid
þ tact/tactlessness be VBB þ tactful/tactless
had VHN been VBN
have VHI be VBI
having VHG being VBG
P. Labrosse
52 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
because there are not enough hits expected for
cowardice and tactlessness with the verb HAVE.
In such a case, the usual (mathematical) approach is
to group the two characteristics. From a linguistic
point of view, however, it would be difficult to
group those two shortcomings and find a semantic
common ground between them.
Two other solutions are available. The first is
to exclude those two characteristics, in which case the
2-test is significant at more than 0.001. But such a
solution is not very satisfactory from a linguistic
point of view. The second (Table 3) is to group
opposites in a semantic field, in keeping with Freud’s
studies of the subconscious (Freud, 1988, especially
pp. 95–96).
The 2-test is again significant at more than
0.001, but it does not prove that certain qualities
or shortcomings co-occur more frequently with
HAVE or BE. It merely proves that some semantic
fields expressing a certain quality and its opposite
shortcoming appear more frequently with HAVE
or with BE, namely HAVE courage/cowardice,
BE beautiful/ugly and BE intelligent/stupid. But we
do not know, for example, whether it is the
collocation of courage or of cowardice with HAVE
that yields this trend. A more discriminatory test is
needed to answer this question.
2.4. The z-score
In France this test is called the ‘reduced’ deviation
test, which seems to be the equivalent of the z-score.
The ‘reduced’ deviation test is the difference
between the percentage observed (po) and the
Table 3 Paired qualities and shortcomings with HAVE and BE
Hits counted Hits expected 2-calculation
Characteristic BE HAVE Total Characteristic BE HAVE
Courage/Cowardice 101 295 396 Courage/Cowardice 335.5 60.5 163.939 909.763
Patience/Impatience 455 140 595 Patience/Impatience 504.2 90.8 4.792 26.593
Tact/Tactlessness 96 5 101 Tact/Tactlessness 85.6 15.4 1.269 7.042
Compassion/Callousness 71 27 98 Compassion/Callousness 83.0 15.0 1.745 9.683
Beauty/Ugliness 1406 66 1472 Beauty/Ugliness 1247.2 224.8 20.206 112.134
Intelligence/Stupidity 1184 64 1248 Intelligence/Stupidity 1057.4 190.6 15.145 84.047 2:
Total 3313 597 3910 Total 3313.0 597.0 207.096 1149.263 1356.359
Table 2 2-test for be courageous/cowardly versus have courage/cowardice
Hits counted Hits expected 2-calculation
Characteristic BE HAVE Total Characteristic BE HAVE
Courage 72 295 367 Courage 94 273 4.986 1.707
Cowardice 29 0 29 Cowardice 7 22 63.099 21.604 2:
Total 101 295 396 Total 101 295 68.085 23.311 91.396
Table 4 Reduced deviation test for BE courageous versus HAVE courage
Verb Hits counted Percentage of
hits counted
(po)
Percentage in
the BNC (p)
n  p Reduced
deviation
Significant at
BE 72 20 76 278.04 25.09750 More than 1 per billion
HAVE 295 80 24 88.96 25.09750 More than 1 per billion
Total (n) 367 100 100 367.00
BE and HAVE: Qualities and Shortcomings
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 53
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
percentage expected (p) over the standard deviation
 (Table 4).
This test highlights differences with various
degrees of significance: HAVE is more frequently
found with certain qualities (compassion, courage,
patience), whereas BE is more frequently associated
with all the shortcomings and also with some
qualities (tactful, beautiful, intelligent).
The fact that the verb HAVE is never significantly
associated more frequently with shortcomings is
consistent with either version of the hypothesis. So is
the fact that the verb BE is always associated more
frequently with shortcomings. But the fact that BE is
also sometimes associated more frequently with
qualities invalidates the strong (or first) version of
the hypothesis (i.e. when a speaker wants to express
somebody’s quality/qualities, (s)he uses the HAVE
þ noun construction). Therefore, to express quali-
ties, the speaker has a choice between HAVEþ noun
or BEþ adjective, whereas (s)he seems to have no
such choice when expressing shortcomings.
These results prompt two questions: is there a
link between the qualities more frequently asso-
ciated with HAVE? And similarly, is there a link
between the qualities more frequently associated
with BE? It is quite obvious that six qualities is not
enough to establish either link and that more
qualities should be studied. Although I had not
studied all the qualities quoted by P. Cotte, I
widened the range of the eleven qualities he quotes.
To do so, I needed to find out what qualities or
shortcomings can collocate with HAVE or BE, and
therefore, to list all the hits for HAVEþ noun and
BEþ adjective. Such a query raises the question of
how one defines a quality or a shortcoming.
3 What Adjectives or Nouns are
to be found with BE or HAVE,
Respectively?
The other reason that led me to study the qualities
and shortcomings associated with BE and HAVE
generally was that I wanted to check whether the
qualities or shortcomings quoted by P. Cotte were
the most frequent to appear in a corpus. This could
prove to the theoretical linguist that corpus linguis-
tics can be of some help.
3.1 Limitations
SARA, however, imposes some limitations on such
a study. First of all, it is not possible to list all the
hits for the BEþ adjective and HAVEþ noun
constructions because it does not allow queries
on grammatical categories. Moreover, the sheer
number of hits for the six qualities already studied
(nearly 4,000) makes it quite difficult to check and
examine numerous new qualities or shortcomings
closely. More precisely, the number of hits for
BEþ adjective ranges from 30 (e.g. be tactless/
cowardly), a number which is quite easy to handle,
to 1,250 (e.g. be beautiful), an amount which is
more difficult to deal with. If I selected 100 qualities
or shortcomings for statistical purposes, examining
each and every occurrence of BEþ adjective could
prove to be an unmanageable task.
3.2 Solution
The solution I adopted was to use the BNC Baby
(version 1.0) as a corpus and XAIRA (XML Aware
Indexing and Retrieval Architecture) as a retrieval
software program. This enhanced version of the
SARA program allows queries on grammatical
categories. Another advantage is that the size of
the corpus is much smaller (four million words
instead of 100 million), which entails a smaller
number of hits. But the correlated drawback is that
the range of media is also smaller, being limited to
spontaneous conversation, academic prose, written
fiction, and newspaper texts.6
3.3 Queries
The queries with XAIRA are quite similar to those
delineated in Section 2.2, except that the different
adjectives or nouns given in Table 1 can be replaced
with the grammatical categories ‘adjective’ or ‘noun’.
So far, my research has concentrated on six verb
forms: is VBZ, be VBB, be VBI, have VHB, has VHZ,
and have VHI. These results, therefore, are only
provisional since the past forms, the past participles
and the gerunds have not yet been considered. Most
importantly, there also remain two present indicative
P. Labrosse
54 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
forms of BE (am VBB and are VBB). But these
queries yielded lists of hits (in XML format, easily
converted into rtf or txt format), out of which I kept
378 hits on HAVE and 2,031 hits on BE. Each and
every hit had to be carefully checked, and sometimes
rejected, a process that I would like to expand upon
in order to rebut the idea that the use of a computer
gives results at the click of a mouse. This account
might also prove useful to the BNC Baby corpus
builders and to the developers of XAIRA.
3.4 Steps to process the answers
to queries
To find out what qualities and shortcomings
collocate with BE and HAVE in the BNC Baby, one
needs to go through three steps:
 Checking that the hits comply with the con-
struction studied.
 Extracting all the adjectives or nouns.
 Extracting the adjectives or nouns expressing
qualities from the adjectives or nouns extracted
in step 2, which implies a definition of quality or
shortcoming.
3.4.1 Checking
As with the hits listed with SARA and the BNC, some
occurrences need to be weeded out. I had to discard
19% of the 466 hits on HAVEþ noun, which seems a
rather high proportion. This proportion reached
more than a quarter of all hits (27.4%) in the case of
hasþ noun. Most of the occurrences discarded
complied with the query, so they were not ‘errors’
strictly speaking. The problem was that, as far as
I know, the query could not be formulated in such
a way as to eliminate this noise. Here are examples
of these unwanted hits along with their references
in the BNC Baby (bold type added):
 Plural compound nouns
He said the regional health authority has air disaster
contingency plans at Stansted. (hit text¼‘CFC’
n¼ ‘57’)
 Causative constructions:
Sometimes she had to have water fetched from
miles up in the mountain. (hit text¼ ‘FAJ’
n¼ ‘3,185’)
 Object complements:
You’ve got to have food available. (hit text ¼ ‘KBD’
n¼ ‘7,345’)
 Interrogative constructions:
Why has History gone wrong? (hit text¼ ‘CTY’
n¼ ‘111’)
 Subject-auxiliary inversion due to adverb
fronting:
‘Never has homo faber better understood that he
has made history and never has he felt so powerless
before history’. (hit text¼ ‘CTY’ n¼ ‘473’)
 Verbþ complement deletion and subject-auxil-
iary inversion:
Seagram, last year’s winner, has been a long way behind
that excellence this season, as has Bonanza Boy, the
1991 favourite . . . (hit text¼ ‘AHC’ n¼ ‘120’)
 Time adverbials:
This is the emotional strain ambulance men
have day in, day out. (hit text¼ ‘A7W’ n¼ ‘511’)
 Quantifiers:
She and Matthew must have plenty to talk about.
(hit text¼ ‘J54’ n¼ ‘2,593’)
 Qualitative modifiers:
Yeah I mean that’s the same as I did I must admit
I did have sort of an argument with him once over
his music. (hit text¼ ‘KB7’ n¼ ‘2,377’)
 Genitives:
And they have granddad’s money. (hit text¼ ‘KD3’
n¼ ‘87’)
 Titles:
For a start, you have goalkeeper Simon Tracey,
signed from Wimbledon last year. (hit text¼ ‘A1N’
n¼ ‘489’)
 Vocatives:
What we gonna have dad? (hit text¼ ‘KBW’
n¼ ‘3,344’)
 Proper names:
But . . . here [Ms Tomei] is the fully-fledged
leading lady of a romance which appears
BE and HAVE: Qualities and Shortcomings
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 55
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to have Beauty and the Beast and Tarzan
and Jane as dual inspirations. (hit text¼ ‘K37’
n¼ ‘184’)
 Phrasal verbs:
Injury-hit Rangers could have debutant England
right-back David Bardsley back after a three-match
absence with an ankle injury. (hit text¼ ‘CH3’
n¼ ‘4,986’)
 Idioms:
He would have Christmas Day off . . . (hit
text¼ ‘CB5’ n¼ ‘197’)
 Formulae:
C will have Cpq¼ 0 and may also have cuv¼ 0 (if
[formula]); but this situation will not persist. (hit
text¼ ‘EWW’ n¼ ‘1,296’)
 Grammatical mistakes/errors:
A one, ju you know, I mean you have complex of
apartments . . . (hit text¼ ‘KCV’ n¼ ‘1,860’) (one
could expect: you have a complex of apartments)
 Tagging errors:
‘. . . we have gurus a dime a dozen’. (hit text¼ ‘AL0’
n¼ ‘199’)
As for the 2,156 hits on BEþ adjective, I rejected
a much smaller proportion of occurrences (5.8%),
the higher proportion (6.2%) relating to the ’s form
of the verb again. As can be seen from the following
examples, there seems to be more errors due to the
building of the corpus or the retrieval software
program:
 Adjectivesþ nouns:
. . . all that is left is abstract philosophy. (hit
text¼ ‘K5C’ n¼ ‘375’)
 Compound nouns:
So one of those is real cheese and one is cream
cheese. (hit text¼ ‘KBW’ n¼ ‘18,564’)
 Genitives modified by an adjective:
This is English law’s rather clumsy attempt
to reflect the element of partial justification in
the doctrine of provocation. (hit text¼ ‘ACJ’
n¼ ‘208’)
 Passive constructions:
. . . the situation is complicated by the fact that
some large ammonites have inner whorls looking
rather like Promicroceras. (hit text¼ ‘AMM’
n¼ ‘590’)
 Interrogative constructions:
Should there be proof of actual danger to someone,
or is potential danger enough? (hit text¼ ‘ACJ’
n¼ ‘636’)
 Subject-auxiliary inversion due to adverb or
adverbial fronting:
Also back on the scene is veteran spinner Keith
Madeley . . . (hit text¼ ‘K3A’ n¼ ‘902’)
 Boundary between two clauses (square brackets
added):
It was in their interests . . . not to let it get about
[that simply [by keeping their hands [where they
ought to be]] young people could have healthy
teeth and gums for life]. (hit text¼ ‘CDB’
n¼ ‘1,705’)
 Grammatical mistakes or transcription errors:
No you be good boy. (hit text¼ ‘KD3’ n¼ ‘10’)
(instead of Now you be a good boy)
 Tagging errors:
(i) adverbþ compound adjective: . . . I’ll be bloody
pig sick! (hit text¼ ‘KCU’ n¼ ‘4,774’)
(ii) progressive form: Midfielder Donnelly is inter-
esting Villa boss Ron Atkinson . . . (hit text¼ ‘CH3’
n¼ ‘6,662’)
(iii) preposition: I actually come from the Dales
from Middleham which is near Leyburn . . . (hit
text¼ ‘KD7’ n¼ ‘64’)
 Typing mistakes:
But . . . there is also a need for serious spending on
infrastructure and services, is well as for start-up
finance or subsidy. (hit text¼ ‘AS6’ n¼ ‘148’)
(instead of as well as)
 Unexplainable results7:
<kw></kw>Alright what do we say about throwing
toys eh? (hit text¼ ‘KBW’ n¼ ‘12,670’) (there is no
verb is or adjective)
P. Labrosse
56 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
<kw></kw>original as far as I know. (hit
text¼ ‘KBD’ n¼ ‘3,579’) (there is no verb is and
the sentence is incomplete)
I discarded 214 hits out of a total of 2,622 hits,
which amounts to an overall percentage of 8.2% and
proves that checking is still a useful, albeit time-
consuming, step.
3.4.2 Extracting all the nouns or adjectives
This step is a preliminary to finding the adjectives
or nouns expressing qualities or shortcomings with
BE or HAVE. At this stage, one can notice that
the ratio of different nouns or adjectives over the
number of hits, which could be called ‘variance’, is
around 42% for BE and 55% for HAVE. When one
considers the three different verb forms studied for
each verb, this variance is also more consistent in
the case of BE (40–44%) than in the case of HAVE
(49–70%). There seems to be no obvious reason
why the range of adjectives with BE should be more
restricted than the range of nouns with HAVE,
apart from the frequent use of constructions
expressing modality (chiefly be able to/capable of ).
Further research could try to categorize those nouns
or adjectives into different semantic fields, an
undertaking that would beg the question of
semantic categories for nouns or adjectives.
3.4.3 Extracting the adjectives or nouns
expressing qualities/shortcomings
3.4.3.1 A question of semantics
This question is also relevant to our study, as we
have to sort out the nouns or adjectives expressing
qualities or shortcomings.
The first source of information one can think of
is the conceptual index of general grammars. In
Huddleston and Pullum, 2002, no mention is made
of ‘quality’ in general or in the semantic classes of
adjectives, whereas a concept such as ‘quantity’ and
the category of ‘noun/NP denoting quantity’ are
mentioned. This is also true of the index of Biber
et al. (1999), which includes a reference to
‘quantifying noun’. In Quirk et al. (1985), ‘quality’
is mentioned as a semantic classification for
partition (e.g. a new kind of computer, delicious
sorts of bread: 249) and for verbs, whereby ‘qualities
are relatively permanent and inalienable properties
of the subject referent’ (e.g. Mary is Canadian/has
blue eyes: 200). This type of quality, however, is
not what P. Cotte seems to have in mind when
comparing have courage/ cowardice and be coura-
geous/cowardly.
One can also look up the definition of quality or
shortcoming in a dictionary. In the Oxford Advanced
Learner’s Dictionary (2000), the most appropriate
definition of quality for our purposes is ‘a thing that
is part of a person’s character, especially sth good:
honesty and generosity’ (p. 1035), and a shortcoming
is ‘a fault in sb’s character, a plan, a system, etc.’
(p. 1186). These definitions take into account moral
and, probably, intellectual qualities, but they do not
seem to include physical qualities like beauty.
A third source of information could be the eleven
examples quoted by P. Cotte, which we mentioned
at the end of section 2.1, but they do not seem
sufficient to extrapolate a general definition. The
last means to sort out qualities could be a test
proposed by a lexicographer8, namely that a quality
noun should collocate with (s)he is gifted with . . .
and she lacks . . .. I personally think that we should
say ‘(s)he is gifted with . . . OR she lacks . . .,’ because
(s)he is gifted with (sex) appeal does not seem right,
contrary to (s)he lacks (sex) appeal. This test, of
course, would not apply to shortcomings.
It is quite obvious that a more precise, if not
convenient, definition of those two concepts is
required. It is clear, however, that these qualities or
shortcomings should apply to human beings. This is
inherent in the explanation given by P. Cotte for the
more frequent use of the HAVEþ noun construc-
tion to express qualities. Yet another problem
occurs: although one can check the definitions of
each and every ‘quality/shortcoming adjective,’ how
should adjectives with multiple meanings like
common be dealt with? Do we check in each and
every utterance whether this adjective expresses a
shortcoming (‘typical of sb from a low social class
and not having good manners’) or a frequency
(‘happening often, existing in large numbers or in
many places¼ commonplace’) and reject all the hits
with the latter meaning? Theoretically, this is what
should be done, but would it be feasible?
BE and HAVE: Qualities and Shortcomings
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 57
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3.4.3.2 List of qualities/(shortcomings) with HAVE
Nine percent of the HAVEþ noun hits express
qualities, a figure which does not seem overwhelm-
ing. Table 5 shows the eighteen quality nouns that
emerge from those hits, in frequency order.
It is noteworthy that no shortcomings collocate
with have, which corroborates both the strong and
weak versions of the hypothesis. Among the eleven
qualities mentioned by P. Cotte, we find only char-
acter, courage, and style. Moreover, these three
qualities are not the most frequent: character
represents 6% of occurrences, and courage and
style only 3%, respectively. They are well below
the two most frequent qualities: knowledge and
experience, which represent 18% of occurrences
each, if we add together experience and mountain
experience.
It is interesting to note that two of these qualities
(character and style) are acquired through learning;
they are less inherent than confidence or faith, for
example. It could be argued that most qualities that
co-occur with HAVE are by and large acquired
through experience: knowledge, experience, character,
power, breeding, influence, leverage, style, and taste.
This would corroborate widely known analyses of
the perfect, especially the present perfect.9
3.4.3.3 List of qualities/shortcomings with BE
How many qualities and how many shortcomings
collocate with BE?
Nearly 40.5% of the BEþ adjective hits express
qualities or shortcomings. If we compare this figure
with the 9% of hits expressing qualities with HAVE,
we have to conclude that, although HAVE is con-
sidered as a state verb, it is not as widely used as BE
for qualifying purposes. This is not very surprising,
since BE is usually divided into three main uses:
existence, identity, and qualification.
For the three different forms of BE examined in
the BNC Baby we find 194 different qualities or
shortcomings, more than ten times the number of
qualities that collocate with HAVE. One has to keep
in mind, however, that the verb BE is more frequent
than the verb HAVE: in the BNC, out of a total of
4.8 million hits for both verbs, HAVE represents
only 24.2% of occurrences. This proportion seems
to imply that we could expect forty-seven different
qualities to appear with HAVE, more than double
the number that we actually found. We could
conclude that the range of qualities and short-
comings expressed is much more narrow with
HAVE than with BE. But such an inference would
not take into account the fact that no shortcomings
collocate with have. And it would run counter
to the variance we calculated for HAVEþ noun,
this noun not being restricted to a quality or a
shortcoming.
I had difficulty classifying some adjectives with
multiple meaning. For example, an adjective like
candid, which is defined as ‘saying what you think
openly and honestly; not hiding your thoughts’
(OALD, 2000, p. 170), could be considered as a
quality or a shortcoming depending on the situa-
tion. When there was only one or very few
occurrences of such an adjective, I could use the
context to classify it.
Finally, I sorted out 110 different quality
adjectives immediately following BE in the BNC
Baby and 84 different shortcoming adjectives. We
can conclude that this verb also seems to favour the
expression of qualities, more so from a numerical
Table 5 Qualities with HAVE in the BNC Baby in
frequency order
Noun Number %
Knowledge 6 18
Experience 5 15
Confidence 3 9
Character 2 6
Faith 2 6
Mercy 2 6
Power 2 6
Appeal 1 3
Breeding 1 3
Capacity 1 3
Commitment, (consultation and collaboration) 1 3
Courage 1 3
Determination and drive 1 3
Experience (mountain ) 1 3
Faith and confidence 1 3
Influence 1 3
Leverage 1 3
Style 1 3
Taste 1 3
Total 34 100
P. Labrosse
58 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
point of view (74.5% of all hits for BEþ adjective)
than from a variety point of view (56.5% of all
adjectives). This confirms the weak version of the
hypothesis, whereby BE can be used to express both
qualities and shortcomings.
From these results for HAVE and BE, we can see
that there is a general tendency to express qualities
rather than shortcomings (since all the clauses
examined are affirmative). This could be accounted
for sociolinguistically or sociologically, if one con-
siders that it is more appropriate to praise people and
to ignore their shortcomings.
How many adjectives exemplify the qualities
quoted by the theoretical linguist?
There are only three adjectives (beautiful—3 hits,
charming—1 hit, patient—6 hits) that exemplify the
qualities quoted by P. Cotte. One finds no occur-
rences of courageous (but there is one occurrence of
brave), intelligent (but there are two of its antonym
stupid) or stylish (which might appear only in
attributive position).
To parallel the list of eighteen qualities expressed
with the HAVEþ noun construction (Table 5),
Table 6 shows the twenty most frequent quality
adjectives following BE. It is quite remarkable that
none of the quality adjectives which we could expect
from the list established by the theoretical linguist
(and especially beautiful, brave, charming, patient)
appear in this list.
Do quality nouns with HAVE have a corre-
sponding quality adjective occurring with BE in the
BNC Baby?
To stay within the field of corpus linguistics,
it would be interesting to see if the qualities
expressed with the HAVEþ noun construction in
the BNC Baby have a corresponding adjective
following BE in the same corpus (Table 7).
It appears that only eight nouns with HAVE have
corresponding adjectives following BE in the BNC
Baby: appeal, capacity, character, confidence, courage,
faith, influence, and leverage. This is not the case for
ten other quality nouns: breeding, commitment,
determination, experience, knowledge, mercy, power,
style, and taste. There does not seem to be a
common denominator to either group of nouns that
could explain why some qualities are also expressed
through the BEþ adjective construction and some
are not.
It is noteworthy that the idea of capacity, which
is certainly the most frequently expressed with the
BEþ adjective construction (able, capable), is not so
well ranked among the HAVEþ noun construc-
tions, near the top of the second half. But I would
not venture to say that there is a reverse order in the
qualities associated with BE and HAVE.
Do the quality adjectives with BE in the BNC
baby have a corresponding quality noun with
HAVE in the BNC?
A complementary line of research is to see which
quality adjectives with BE in the BNC Baby have a
corresponding quality noun with HAVE. Such a
query has to be put to the BNC since we already
know the answers from the BNC Baby (Table 5).
This will give us another opportunity to increase the
list of qualities that can be expressed with HAVE.
Two preliminary remarks have to be made. The
first is that all those quality adjectives have a corre-
sponding noun, some difficult cases being solved
with the -ness suffix only.10 The second remark is that
some adjectives have a corresponding noun with
a different usage. For example, agreeable means:
‘pleasant and easy to like’ (OALD, 2000, p. 25). But
She is agreeable would not have for equivalent:  She
Table 6 List of the top twenty quality adjectives
immediately following BE in frequency order
Adjective Number %
Able 140 22.9
Important 47 7.7
Nice 37 6.0
Careful 31 5.1
True 24 3.9
Good 21 3.4
Quiet 18 2.9
Honest 13 2.1
Interesting 13 2.1
Relevant 11 1.8
Strong 11 1.8
Useful 11 1.8
Bold 10 1.6
Independent 9 1.5
Responsible 9 1.5
Capable 8 1.3
Helpful 8 1.3
Open 8 1.3
Confident 7 1.1
Quick 7 1.1
BE and HAVE: Qualities and Shortcomings
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 59
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
has pleasure and easiness (to like). Agreeable is a
description, an evaluation (cf. the category ‘evalua-
tive adjectives’), usually by somebody different from
the subject referent (I am agreeable sounds strange).
It is not a quality that somebody has in him/herself,
and from which that same person benefits, a feature
which is typical of HAVE. It is a quality that is
appreciated by somebody else because that some-
body else benefits from this quality.
Similarly, amazing means: ‘very surprising,
especially in a way that makes you feel pleasure or
admiration’ (OALD, 2000, p. 35). -Ing adjectives
seem to imply that somebody different from the
subject referent feels something for his/her own
benefit or to his/her detriment. If one could say:
 He is amazing, so he has amazement, amazement
would be a feeling that would have to be felt by the
subject referent. The same is true for surprising
versus surprise.
Desirable seems very similar. This -able adjective
means: ‘(of a person) causing other people to feel
sexual desire’ (OALD, 2000, pp. 340–341). A feeling
or reaction is caused by the subject referent but is
not felt by this same subject referent: she is desirable
does not mean She has a strong desire for X.11 The
same is true for attractive versus attractiveness.
In Table 8, we notice only four examples (beauty,
charm, intelligence, patience) out of the eleven
examples given by P. Cotte, these four examples
totalling 35 hits (6.8% of all hits). It must be
remembered that some adjectives (courageous,
intelligent, stylish) do not immediately follow BE
in the BNC Baby. The most frequent example
(charm) ranks sixth in the list. Most importantly, we
can add twenty-seven quality nouns to this list.
Although some linguists say it is limited by its
corpora, it is clear that corpus linguistics widens the
range of research.
These qualities do not seem to share a common
denominator apart from the syntactic property of
entering the HAVEþ noun construction and the
semantic property of applying to humans. Yet, if we
take a close look at the examples, we notice that a
certain proportion of subjects do not refer to
humans. To give only two examples:
It is not Venice but it has warmth, colour,
and views such as could stretch the most
infertile imagination. (hit text¼ ‘CN4’
n¼ ‘804’)
It is the grid for a scene of battle, whether it
be the Rout of San Romano by Uccello or
Guernica by Picasso. Whereas both vertical
Table 7 Adjectives corresponding to HAVEþ noun constructions in the BNC Baby
Rank with HAVE Noun (with HAVE) Adjective (with BE) Rank with BE
1 Knowledge Knowledgeable¼ 0 hit
2 Experience Experienced¼ 0 hit
3 Confidence Confident¼ 7 hits (1.1%) 19
4 Character Strong-willed; courageous; firm¼ 2 hits (0.3%); resolute. 41
5 Faith Faithful¼ 1 hit (0.2%) 52
6 Mercy Merciful¼ 0 hit
7 Power Powerful¼ 0 hit
8 Appeal Attractive¼ 2 hits (0.3%); 41
Interesting¼ 13 hits (2.1%) 8
9 Breeding Well-bred¼ 0 hit
10 Capacity Capable¼ 8 hits (1.3%); 14
Able¼ 140 hits (22.9%) 1
11 Commitment Committed¼ 0 hit
12 Courage Courageous; brave¼ 1 hit (0.2%) 52
13a Determination Determined; resolute¼ 0 hit
13b Drive Energetic; dynamic¼ 0 hit
14 Influence Influential¼ 1 hit (0.2%) 52
15 Leverage Influential¼ 1 hit (0.2%) 52
16 Style Stylish¼ 0 hit
17 Taste Elegant, refined¼ 0 hit
P. Labrosse
60 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and horizontal lines have stability, sloping
lines are in a state of change from one
condition to the other. (hit text¼ ‘ADX’
n¼ ‘556’)
Although it cannot be denied that these qualities
generally apply to humans, this tendency admits
exceptions which the use of corpora can highlight.
Admittedly, our results are only provisional, as we
need to study all the other forms of the verbs BE and
HAVE, starting with the remaining forms of the
present indicative of BE. But one already has to
qualify the claim that a zero article precedes the
noun in the HAVEþ quality noun construction
because the subject referent is human and every
human, including the speaker, would like to share in
this quality.
4 Conclusion
I hope it has become evident that corpus linguistics
does not yield results with a simple click of a mouse.
One has to check all the hits, which can be quite
numerous.
This study has also shown that corpus linguistics
enables the linguist to check (and correct) his/her
hypotheses. I proved that the first hypothesis (when
a speaker wants to express a person’s quality/
qualities, (s)he uses the HAVEþ noun construc-
tion) was overstated, and that a weaker hypothesis
seems to hold: the verb HAVE is not used to express
shortcomings; the verb BE can be used to express
either qualities or shortcomings.
It has finally been shown that corpus linguistics
widens the scope of research and promotes further
research: new qualities and shortcomings have been
found and can be studied more thoroughly. Using
the BNC and SARA, we could further calculate and
compare the frequencies for the qualities that we
had found and that can be expressed with BE and
HAVE. Another possible study would be to check
that there are no nouns with HAVE expressing the
shortcomings found with BE. We could also verify
that BE collocates more frequently with inanimate
subjects, although we have seen that HAVE can
collocate with such subjects.
Thus, corpus linguistics can change the way
French linguists do linguistics on English or any
other language. Some linguists are happy with a few
examples and work out a whole theory out of them.
Others will obviously offer counterexamples and
think they prove the first theory wrong. This is very
much a matter of seeing linguistic phenomena in
black and white, whereas a corpus linguist generally
has a more balanced attitude. (S)he provides more
examples to check a theory and highlights trends
which (s)he or the theoretical linguist still has to
explain.
Table 8 Haveþ quality nouns in the BNC corresponding
to the BEþ quality adjectives in the BNC Baby
Quality adjective Quality noun Number %
Able Ability 8 1.6
Active (Physical) Activity 1 0.2
Autonomous Autonomy 5 1.0
Beautiful Beauty 2 0.4
Brilliant Brilliance 0
Intelligence 5 1.0
Charming Charm 16 3.1
Confident Confidence 99 19.2
Consistent Consistency 1 0.2
Famous Fame 2 0.4
Good Goodness 1 0.2
Honest Honesty 1 0.2
Honourable Honour 2 0.4
Important Importance 8 1.6
Authority12 93 18.1
Independent Independence 2 0.4
Influential Influence 19 3.7
Logical Logic 1 0.2
Nice nicenEss; 1 0.2
Open Openness 2 0.4
Patient Patience 12 2.3
Pure Purity 2 0.4
Relevant Relevance 37 7.2
Responsible Responsibility 154 29.8
Sensible Sense 9 1.7
Sensitive Sensitivity 2 0.4
Stable Stability 4 0.8
Strong Strength 14 2.7
Successful Success 5 1.0
Tough and wise-cracking Toughness 1 0.2
Traditional Tradition 2 0.4
Warm Warmth 4 0.8
Wise Wisdom 2 0.4
Total 516 100.0
Bold typeface indicates the four examples given by P. Cotte that
appear in the BNC.
BE and HAVE: Qualities and Shortcomings
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 61
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Acknowledgements
Data herein has been extracted from the British
National Corpus Online Service, managed by the
University Computing Services on behalf of the
BNC Consortium. All rights in the texts cited are
reserved.
References
Aston, G. and Burnard, L. (1998). The BNC Handbook:
Exploring the British National Corpus with SARA.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Biber, D., Johanson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., and
Finegan, E. (1999). Longman Grammar of Spoken and
Written English. Harlow: Longman Pearson Education
Ltd.
Boisson, C. (1987). Anglais HAVE, franc¸ais AVOIR et
l’empathie in La Transitivite´. Universite´ de Saint
Etienne: C.I.E.R.E.C. Travaux 52, pp. 155–81.
Cotte, P. (1996). L’explication Grammaticale de Textes
Anglais. Perspectives Anglo-Saxonnes. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France Coll. Perspectives anglo-
saxonnes.
Cotte, P. (1997). Grammaire linguistique. Paris: Didier
Erudition – CNED.
Cotte, P. (1998). Have n’est pas un verbe d’action:
l’hypothe`se de la re´e´laboration. In Rousseau, A. (ed.),
La transitivite´ Villeneuve d’Ascq: Presses Universitaires
du Septentrion Coll. Travaux et Recherches,
pp. 415–39.
Freud, S. (1988). Sur le Reˆve. Paris: Gallimard.
Hornby, A. S. (2000). Oxford Advanced Learner’s
Dictionary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Huddleston, R. and Pullum, G. K. (2002). The
Cambridge Grammar of the English Language.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
OALD (2000) see Hornby, A. S. (2000).
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., and Svartvik, J.
(1985). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. Harlow: Longman Group UK Ltd.
Notes
1 Throughout this article, the term ‘quality’ will mean
‘excellence of disposition; good natural gifts’ for
animates, and ‘the degree or grade of excellence, etc.,
possessed by a thing’ for inanimates, as explained in
the Articles 1c and 8 of the OED. This concept is
studied in Section 3.4.3.1.
2 This remark, and the following first hypothesis, were
put forward during a seminar in October 2004. For
further discussion of the verb have, see Cotte (1996)
(especially pp. 72–4 and pp. 93–105), Cotte (1997)
especially pp. 43–65, 116–30, and pp. 213–48), and
Cotte (1998).
3 See the analysis of the generic man in P. Cotte,
1996: 218.
4 P. Cotte quotes eleven qualities altogether. Backbone,
character, charm, grit, personality, spirit, and style
would have to be added to the four qualities studied
here.
5 The meaning of the part-of-speech tags can be found
in Aston and Burnard (1998, pp. 230–3). Concerning
the verb BE, VBB is the present tense forms, except for
is or ’s; VBD is the past tense forms; VBG is the -ing
form; VBI is the infinitive form; VBN is the past
participle form, and VBZ is the -s form. As for the
verb HAVE, VHB is the finite base form; VHD is
the past tense form; VHG is the -ing form; VHI is the
infinitive form; VHN is the past participle form, and
VHZ is the -s form.
6 In the BNC, there are five classes of written media,
apart from ‘unclassified’ (0.5%): books, periodicals,
miscellaneous published, miscellaneous unpublished,
and written-to-be-spoken. In the BNC Baby, ‘written
fiction’ seems to be a mix of <medium¼ books> and
<domain¼ imaginative>. Therefore, books seem to be
limited to one domain, imaginative. The category
‘academic prose’ does not seem to have a well-defined
medium: books, periodicals, miscellaneous published,
or miscellaneous unpublished. ‘Periodicals’ should
probably be excluded since the media classification of
the BNC Baby provides for the category ‘newspaper
texts’. Quite rightly, the domain of this category is not
specified, as it ranges over arts, belief and thought,
commerce and finance, leisure, natural and pure
science, applied science, social science, and world
affairs in the BNC.
7 The tags <kw></kw> should indicate the query
focus; in this case, they should be positioned between
the verb form is and an adjective, e.g. He is <kw>
</kw>able and energetic.
8 F. Antoine, personal communication.
9 See Cotte (1996, p. 73) or (1997, p. 232) among many
possible references.
10 F. Antoine remarks (personal communication) that
the fact that many nouns ending in -ness are not very
common could account for the relatively high
P. Labrosse
62 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
proportion of BEþ adjective constructions to express
qualities. The proportion of these nouns would have
to be checked first to confirm this interesting
hypothesis.
11 Thus the difference between desirability and desire.
12 Important is also glossed as influent. The correspond-
ing noun (influence) is examined when dealing with
influential.
BE and HAVE: Qualities and Shortcomings
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 63
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
