
1 What are Working Papers?
1.1 Definition
Working papers are unpublished versions of journal
articles, book chapters, book reviews, or other
research-related manuscripts which are collected
and disseminated in a systematic way. They vary in
terms of completion from work in progress, which
has not been submitted to a journal or publisher, to
a manuscript that has been accepted for publication,
but is not yet revised for its final submission.
Authors normally contribute to such series in the
hope of getting valuable feedback on current
research, which they intend to publish formally.
However, those coordinating working-paper series
can never guarantee contributions will be published
and a minority of them are never peer-reviewed
nor make it into print (Kling, 2004, pp. 608–15;
Ober et al., 2007, p. 233). Across the research sector
papers circulating in this manner have been
variously called grey literature, pre-prints, research
manuscripts or memoranda, technical reports, and
working papers (Kling, 2004, pp. 596–8). The last is
the term of choice among social scientists.
Correspondence:
David Pritchard,
Department of Classics and
Ancient History, School of
Philosophical and Historical
Inquiry, The University of
Sydney, NSW 2006,
Australia.
E-mail:
david.pritchard@
usyd.edu.au
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press
onbehalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
149
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn005 Advance Access Published on 26 March 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
1.2 Invention, Development, and Spread
Working papers were invented by scientists several
decades before the advent of the internet (Kling,
2004, pp. 596–7). Although they were first circulated
by electronics experts at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT) in 1946, this form of com-
munication was developed most fully by high-
energy physicists. In 1962, the first director of
the Stanford Linear Accelerator Centre (SLAC),
W.K.H. Panofsky, asked his library to begin
collecting work-in-progress papers by high-energy
physicists from around the world (Kreitz et al.,
1997, pp. 24–32). With the assistance of the library
of the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN), the SLAC library quickly established
manual systems for obtaining, cataloguing, and
archiving unpublished manuscripts.
As high-energy physicists needed a high level of
computer literacy to operate in their computer-
dependent field, in subsequent decades they had a
leading part in the development of the computer-
based management of their pre-prints, along the
way inventing the computerized database, e-mail,
and the World Wide Web (Kreitz et al., 1997, p. 26).
In 1974, the completion of the Stanford Public
Information Retrieval System–High-Energy Physics
(SPIRES–HEP) allowed working papers to be
catalogued by computer (Addis, 2002; Kreitz et al.,
1997, pp. 24–6). Run collaboratively with the
Deutsche Elektronon Synchroton, this database
recorded the bibliographical details and abstracts
of working papers and the general subjects they
addressed. In 1982, the SLAC library became one of
the first worldwide to get rid of its card catalogue,
while, by 1985, high-energy physicists in forty-four
countries had access to its computerized database
through 662 locally based servers that were con-
nected to SPIRES–HEP via a precursor of the
internet.
Rapid change in this mode of scholarly commu-
nication was set in train by two high-energy
physicists in 1991 (Kreitz et al., 1996, pp. 27–31,
32 n. 9). Mid year Paul Ginsparg of the Los Alamos
National Laboratory (LANL) finalized a new system
for collecting, publicizing, and archiving working
papers electronically (Ginsparg, 1994). Physicists
could now send versions of papers written in the
newly invented formatting language of TeX, which
reproduced mathematical formulae in basic key-
board characters, to an electronic archive at LANL,
which was originally called xxx.lanl.gov. There they
were grouped according to general subjects and
assigned archive numbers. Each evening a list of the
details and archive numbers of the working papers
received during the day was sent via e-mail to
subscribers of a list-server, who were free to transfer
electronically from the archive any papers of
interest. The librarians of SLAC very quickly
automated the inclusion of the bibliographic details
of these pre-prints into SPIRES–HEP and began
posting electronically printer friendly versions of
them on the database, which they continued to do
until 1995, when this function was taken over by the
LANL archive itself. In late 1991, Tim Berners-Lee
and his team at CERN invented the World Wide
Web by combining available hypertext and file-
sharing protocols and building the first web-
browser and server (Berners-Lee et al., 1992). This
was immediately recognized at SLAC as a superior
way of providing remote access to SPIRES–HEP
and, within a few months, one of its high-energy
physicists had set up the first web-server in North
America to do so (Addis, 2002). By the end of 1994
most searches of its database were conducted online,
while around 70% of working papers were sub-
mitted electronically.
These two inventions of 1991 steadily increased
the number of working papers by high-energy
physicists and have brought about a complete
change in the way they communicate with each
other. The LANL archive has become arXiv.org
(http://www.arxiv.org/), which is probably the
best-known discipline-based repository worldwide
(Kling, 2004, pp. 605, 608–15). Today owned and
operated by the Cornell University Library,
arXiv.org has gone beyond high-energy physics,
now collecting working papers from mathematics,
non-linear science, computer science, statistics, and
other subdisciplines of physics as well. This archive
currently holds more than 4,000 papers, gets tens of
thousands of ‘hits’ or connections per hour, and
processes more than 20 million requests for pre-
prints each year. These extraordinary numbers bear
out a significant shift of scholarly communication
D. Pritchard
150 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
among high-energy physicists: they communicate
today largely via working papers, with peer-
reviewed articles serving only as the credentials
they require to get a post, tenure, or a promotion
(Ober et al., 2007, pp. 235–6).
At the same time as discipline-wide working
papers were being developed in high-energy physics
during the 1960s and 1970s, increasing numbers
of individual departments and laboratories were
setting up pre-print series of their own (Kling, 2004,
pp. 597–603). The first to do so were in the
fields of artificial intelligence, high-energy physics,
and mathematics. A decade later they began
spreading into the social sciences where they
appeared most commonly in departments of
demography, economics, and linguistics. In the
mid to late 1990s many of these series were
moved online, as the web became a cheaper and
easier platform for distribution. In so doing
departments made their pre-prints available to
everyone with a browser and internet access,
expanding profoundly the pool of potential readers.
Strikingly however, the internet has not signifi-
cantly expanded the number of disciplines using
working papers, while a majority of university
departments still do not have pre-print series.
In this area, the humanities continues to perform
particularly poorly, lagging well behind the
sciences and social sciences in its use of cyber-
space to circulate work-in-progress or published
research (Houghton et al., 2006, p. 54). As such
the Princeton—Stanford Working Papers in Classics
(hereafter PSWPC) probably is the first department-
based series of working papers in the humanities
(Poynder, 2005).
2 The PSWPC Series
2.1 Inception
The original idea for creating a working-paper series
in classics and related disciplines came to Josiah
Ober, as a result of his service on a university-wide
committee for selections and promotions at
Princeton University (Ober et al., 2007, pp. 231–3).
There he encountered listings of so-called working
papers in the curricula vitae of social-science
candidates. The operation of pre-print series and
their benefits were explained to him by another
committee member, Gene Grossman, who had set
up a department-based series of working papers in
economic theory during the 1980s. As a long-
standing advocate of the importance of social-
science approaches for classical studies, Ober
quickly grasped the potential of pre-prints for
our discipline. Plans for setting up such a series
were developed when Ober, as a visiting researcher
at Stanford University, discussed this form of
scholarly communication with Walter Scheidel,
who knew of working papers because of a long
research interest in demography. Scheidel pointed
out how running such a series as a collaboration
between their respective departments would
enhance its benefits: the pooling of their working
papers would attract a broader readership, while
increasing the number of series-organizers would
lower the administrative burden falling on any one
individual. Scheidel has subsequently become the
academic coordinator of the series at Stanford and
its best represented author, with his working
papers representing a fifth of its current offerings.
Within the Department of Classics at Princeton
University two colleagues have helped them bring
their plans into effect. Brent Shaw has promoted
the initiative publicly and serves as its other
academic coordinator. As the department’s IT
manager Donna Sanclemente, using general
web-design software, met her brief to set up
an online series as quickly and cheaply as
possible, with the PSWPC website going live in
December 2005.
2.2 Expectations
The PSWPC-creators decided to run their initiative
initially as an experiment in order to determine the
viability of working papers in classical studies, get a
better idea of costs and benefits, and receive
feedback from users before deciding on its final
form (Ober et al., 2007, pp. 230–1, 238–9). This
desire of theirs to test the waters is easy to
understand: web-based series of pre-prints normally
thrive only when they are in tune with discipline-
based working arrangements and perceived require-
ments and follow upon paper-based practices
dating back decades (Kling and McKim, 2000).
Working Papers, Open Access, and Cyber-infrastructure
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 151
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
For example, although dispersed at three-thousand
or so departments and laboratories around the
world, high-energy physicists have long valued the
speedy dissemination of new work as vital for
building on each other’s research, avoiding blind
alleys in the development of theory and the costly
duplication of experiments, and publicly registering
new ideas as one’s own (Kreitz et al., 1997,
pp. 25–6). Consequently, they have perceived the
time lag of traditional publishing to be detrimental
to their work and hence embraced working
papers as a form of scholarly communication. In
contrast, the practices and perceptions of the
humanities are very different to those of high-
energy physics and the other disciplines with
working papers, a situation which renders the
introduction of such a series into classical studies
inherently risky: time and resources might be
poured into the required cyber-infrastructure, but
there is no guarantee ancient historians and
classicists will actually make use of it by posting
their research-related scripts (Lane, 2006).
In these circumstances the PSWPC-creators
understandably entertained only modest expecta-
tions about its initial performance. They only
expected to get a few dozen or so working papers
(Sanclemente, personal correspondence). They
thought most of them would be downloaded by
students and academics, while the series would
only serve limited scholarly functions: it would cut
down the time lag between the writing up of
research and its availability to others and allow
authors of work in progress to get helpful feedback
(Poynder, 2005).
2.3 Design
The website of the PSWPC is visually appealing
and easily navigated (http://www.princeton.edu/
pswpc/index.html). The home page of each
department displays a hyperlink to the PSWPC-
website, which is hosted by the computer server of
the Department of Classics at Princeton University
(Ober et al., 2007, p. 230). As ancient historians
and classicists are unfamiliar with this method of
scholarly communication, the introductory web
pages appropriately explain what working papers
are, how they can be used, and the way they
are collected. In these pages, readers are granted
permission to use its pre-prints in their own
scholarship, given a suggested form for citing
them, and encouraged to send feedback to the
authors of individual papers via e-mail. The website
allows readers to view its current offerings by
individual author, the department to which con-
tributors belong, the year papers were collected,
or the general subjects each working paper covers.
Each of these viewing options generates a list of
bibliographical details or so-called metadata paper
by paper. Each dataset consists of a unique series
number, the title of the working paper, the name
of its author, his or her department and university,
and an abstract of up to 150 words. By clicking the
PDF icon beside each entry readers download
a printer friendly version of the work-in-progress
paper.
The introductory web pages also provide instruc-
tions for members of the Princeton and Stanford
departments wishing to contribute manuscripts to
the series. For a contributor the first step is the
downloading of a standard cover page, on which
they provide the metadata and version number of
the manuscript, the date of the version’s comple-
tion, and his or her e-mail address. The next steps
are the attaching of this sheet to a soft copy of the
paper and the converting of the file so created into
a PDF, which is e-mailed as an attachment to the
relevant departmental coordinator. Within this
e-mail the author indicates which one or more of
the thirteen general subjects the series recognizes he
or she wishes the pre-print to be listed under. The
coordinator ‘checks to see that the formatting is
correct’ before sending the PDF to the IT manager
of the Princeton department, who ‘mounts the file,
ensuring that it is properly cross linked by author,
date, institution, and subject area’ (Ober et al., 2007,
p. 230 n. 5). Since authors retain the copyright of
their manuscripts, at any time they can request a
pre-print of theirs to be replaced with an updated
version or removed from the website. Even in its
experimental form the PSWPC series compares
favourably to the established working papers of
other departments, which usually do not provide
explanations of what pre-prints are nor multiple
viewing options.
D. Pritchard
152 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3 The Performance of the
PSWPC Series
By now this series has been running long enough to
evaluate reliably its performance and the viability of
working papers as a method of communication in
classical studies. Evaluating the PSWPC is made
easier by the range of usage data that its creators
have made available. After 2 years of operation their
experiment has proven to be a largely unqualified
success: the series has exceeded initial expectations
and performs important scholarly and community-
outreach functions. In both departments very good
numbers have taken advantage of this web-based
initiative. As of 11 November 2007 the series has
ninety-nine working papers by thirty-three con-
tributors. Eight of its pre-prints have been with-
drawn because of their final publication in an edited
collection or journal, while another eleven have
been replaced with revised versions. As such the
sponsoring departments are already making freely
available a large number of work-in-progress
papers, whose total extent is the equivalent of
eight or more edited collections. Around 70% of
these pre-prints may be by Stanford-based research-
ers, but the percentage of participating faculty there
is some 25 points lower than at Princeton where
63% of their colleagues have working papers.
The series has also built up a large and apparently
diverse readership. In December 2006 when the
downloads of its working papers were first mea-
sured, they were already running at 1,750 per week
(Ober et al., 2007, p. 232). They were 1,910 per
week when counted again in September 2007
(Sanclemente, personal correspondence). A large
number of these requests have come from uni-
versities and colleges across the United States.
In turn a good number of academics around the
world are already e-mailing back comments; for
although some PSWPC contributors are still waiting
for feedback, others have received from those
researching similar topics valuable tips, bibliogra-
phy, ancient testimonia, and, at times, unpublished
papers (Scheidel, personal correspondence). Clearly,
these working papers are fulfilling the two scholarly
tasks which the creators of the series initially
foresaw: they are making available to ancient
historians and classicists a lot of research in advance
of final publication and successfully soliciting feed-
back for their authors.
Yet, the PSWPC is also performing other
important functions, which were not fully antici-
pated at its inception. Tellingly, the connections to
its website not resulting in downloads has remained
several times larger in number than the requests
for pre-prints; for when the total number of hits
were measured in November 2006, they came to a
surprisingly large 1,600 per day (Ober et al., 2007,
p. 232). As of September 2007 they were running at
the lower rate of 1,100 per day (Sanclemente,
personal correspondence). Although many of these
connections have been made by private networks
and private sources within Australia, Britain,
Canada, and the United States, the sum of the hits
from these larger Anglophone countries is balanced
by those coming from developed and developing
countries from across the globe (Ober et al., 2007,
pp. 232–3). Admittedly, some of the connections
from non-university sources are presumably coming
from academics and students who are using their
own internet service providers. However, their
apparent volume and the high ratio of hits to
downloads suggest members of the general public
are also browsing the website. As such the PSWPC
contributors are probably picking up a wider range
and a greater number of readers than they would
have done if they had continued to have published
only in scholarly books and journals. Consequently,
this series is providing two other benefits, which its
sponsoring departments did not anticipate: it is
raising their international profiles higher and
increasing the so-called research impact of their
members.
4 The Reasons for its Success and
the Viability of Working Papers
4.1 Meeting of disciplinary requirements
There appear to be four significant reasons why the
PSWPC has already secured large numbers of
contributors and readers. Two of these concern its
congruency with practices and perceptions within
classical studies. Although ancient historians and
Working Papers, Open Access, and Cyber-infrastructure
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 153
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
classicists collaborate with others and co-author
publications much less frequently than scientists
and social scientists, they have always valued
catching up on work in progress by colleagues and
receiving informed feedback on their own. But
because of the modest size of our departments and
their dispersal worldwide, communication with
other specialists has required long-distance corre-
spondence, which, before e-mail, was done by
individual scholars posting each other hardcopies
of papers and memoranda (Kling, 2004, p. 596;
Ober et al., 2007, p. 234). Moreover, the sharing
of work in progress has long been the formal
justification for our attending or convening of
conferences. Consequently, this pre-print series
might not enjoy a specific paper-based precedent,
but it clearly builds on longstanding practices of our
discipline and provides a good way for meeting one
of its perceived needs: the sharing of in-progress
research among specialists.
4.2 Standing of computers in
classical studies
A second reason for its success is the entrenched use
of computers by ancient historians and classicists,
which has positively disposed our discipline more
than others in the humanities to computer-based
innovations. Many outside of classics are surprised
to learn of its leading role in computing and the
widespread use of computer-based tools by its
philologists for two decades. The relationship
between classics and the computer began in 1949
when Robert Busa convinced the president of IBM
to collaborate on the production of the first com-
plete concordance of the Latin writings of Thomas
Aquinas (Hockey, 2004, pp. 4–7). The subsequent
history of computers within classical studies and the
multiple ends to which they have been put are well
studied by others (Brunner, 1993; Crane, 2004). As
such this article focuses on two of the most
important developments for the shaping of percep-
tions of computers among ancient-world experts,
namely the integration of computerized corpora of
primary sources into classical philology and the
heavy reliance on a so-called open-access archive of
reviews of classical-studies books.
In 1972, the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG)
Project was set up by Theodore Brunner of the
University of California at Irvine, who would serve
as its first director for 25 years (Berkowitz, 1993;
Brunner, 1987; Hughes, 1987). The goal of this
project was the producing of a computer-readable
database of the surviving literature of the ancient
Greeks from Homer to the 7th century of our era.
The possibility of this had been opened up by the
invention of an ASCII-based code by David W.
Packard a few years earlier, which reproduced Greek
letters, accents, and breathings in basic keyboard
characters (Packard, 1973). As an accomplished
classicist and the son of a co-founder of the Hewlett
Packard Corporation, Packard has remained a
central figure in the integration of computers into
classical studies for decades. While the TLG Project
had access to his code, the data processing of more
than a millennium of literature was a truly
herculean task: 60 million words of Greek had to
be entered manually on IBM punch cards, con-
solidated work by work onto magnetic tape, and
checked for accuracy by a team of classicists
(Brunner, 1987, pp. 1, 6–7). All up this took over
15 years and cost 6 million US dollars, with the
TLG first released in tape and CD-ROM formats
(Hughes, 1987, pp. 4–5).
During this long period of production the
interest of classicists in this computer-based
corpus grew strongly, as increasing numbers realized
its potential for transforming the traditional prac-
tices and scope of philological research (Brunner,
1993, pp. 17–27). However, as few outside of the
TLG Project had the expertise, hardware and
mainframe access to run such a searchable database,
this potential would not have been realized as
quickly as it was if not for the ongoing work of
Packard in the 1970s. He modified the design of the
new Hewlett-Packard Minicomputer and its oper-
ating system to create a portable computer, which
could display and edit Greek, Hebrew and Latin
scripts, and search the TLG and other databases
(Crane, 2004, pp. 48–8; Hughes, 1986). The first
commercialized version of what Packard called the
Ibycus was showcased at the annual conference
of the American Philological Association (APA)
in 1979. Despite costing over 10 000 US dollars,
D. Pritchard
154 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a dozen or so departments quickly purchased one.
By the time of the release of the third CD-ROM of
the TLG in 1987, the cost of the Ibycus had fallen
considerably to 4 000 US dollars, allowing 200 or
more other departments worldwide to make use of
this database (Brunner, 1987, p. 9; Hughes, 1987,
p. 6). The spread of computer-aided philology right
across our discipline was ensured by two related
developments of the late 1980s. Gregory Crane of
Harvard University and others developed new
programs for running computerized corpora on
any general purpose computer, such as the Apple
Macintosh or IBM PC, while the Packard
Humanities Institute produced and marketed
CD-ROMs of classical Latin literature (Brunner,
1993, p. 27; Crane, 2004, pp. 48–9). By 1993 around
1,400 institutions worldwide had paid a licensing fee
for use of the TLG CD-ROM (Brunner, 1993, p. 33
n. 76). The distribution of these disks ceased in 2001
when the TLG was successfully moved online
(http://www.tlg.uci.edu/).
The dissemination of the TLG and other textual
databases not only impacted positively on philology
but also quickly confirmed the utility of computing
within classical studies. As a result, ancient histor-
ians and classicists as a whole have been well
disposed to subsequent computer-based innova-
tions, whether they have been in research, teaching,
or scholarly communication. Of these, the most
important has probably been the Bryn Mawr
Classical Review (hereafter BMCR), which is the
second oldest electronic journal in the humanities
(http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/bmcr/). Established by
Richard Hamilton and James O’Donnell at Bryn
Mawr College in 1990, this journal began distribut-
ing its contents exclusively via e-mail (Crane, 2004,
p. 48; Hardwick, 2000, p. 285). Each review was
submitted electronically, refereed and edited within
only a few months, and sent within an electronic
message to the subscribers of the journal’s list-
server. For the sake of speeding up scholarly
communication the e-mail address of the reviewer
was normally included, while the journal published
the formal exchanges of what could be very
colourful responses between reviewers and authors.
Several months after the invention of the web by
high-energy physicists in late 1991, BMCR set up
an internet-based archive where printer friendly
versions of reviews could be posted initially and
remain available for readers to search either via the
date of their publication or the name of the reviewer
or author. A few years later the hyperlink to each
review’s web page was included in the email versions
sent to subscribers.
In its first full year of operation BMCR garnered
some 300 subscribers and 124 reviews (Hamilton,
personal correspondence). Numbers steadily rose,
however, as more and more scholars came to realize
the advantages of this computer-based initiative: its
free and easy circulation, the utility of its archive,
and its publishing of reviews in only a fraction of the
time print-based journals needed. Five years later,
in 1995, the journal had 1,342 subscribers and 256
reviews. Since then the rate of growth has not
abated: by 2006 BMCR had around 9,000 subscri-
bers and published 572 reviews, while its website
processes extraordinary numbers of daily requests
for archived reviews. In October 2007, for example,
requests were running at 8,892 per day, with the
grand total of annual requests to the end of this
month coming to 3, 371, 608.1 Although a portion
of the web pages which are requested are probably
never read, these numbers point strongly to the
integration of this open-access archive into the daily
work-routines of ancient historians and classicists.
As such BMCR has probably done more than any
other computer-based initiative to habituate our
discipline to the free availability of scholarship on
online and hence to lay the ground for the success
of the PSWPC.
4.3 Demand for open-access research
Admittedly, a good proportion of connections to
the websites of the BMCR and PSWPC and to other
open-access initiatives of classical studies are not
made by academics and their students. Indeed, we
have reason to believe there already is solid interest
in this series of working papers from outside of the
research sector. In fact, this happens to be a third
reason for its success. By making its offerings
available to anyone with a browser and internet
access the PSWPC helps satisfy worldwide demand
for open-access research on antiquity. Many of these
so-called interested readers are simply members of
Working Papers, Open Access, and Cyber-infrastructure
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 155
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the public; as the rediscovery and appropriation of
Graeco-Roman art and literature have long been
mainstays of modern cultures, there is an abiding
popular interest in the subject matter of our
discipline, with the curiosity of some piqued
enough for them to seek out ‘hard’ information
on the ancient Mediterranean. Serious interest also
comes from our former students as well as
secondary-school pupils and their teachers
(Doherty, 2005).
This general interest in the ancient world may be
strong, but a sobering reality is that our lay readers
have relatively limited access to our written research
(Houghton et al., 2006, pp. 33–4). The borrowing of
books and edited collections from university
libraries are preserves usually of salaried academics
and enrolled students, while most outside of this
circle do not have the opportunity or wherewithal to
access these collections by walking in. Consequently,
members of the public with a serious interest in our
discipline largely rely on their own purchases of
books, the usually slim pickings of community or
school libraries, and whatever internet-searches
throw up. For the last several years the staff and
students of universities with well-resourced research
libraries have been able to download articles from
leading journals via local networks, which might
give the impression that a lot of our scholarship is
freely available in cyberspace. In fact, such requests
are only possible because of the annual subscrip-
tions our libraries pay for so-called bundles of titles
in electronic format (Cox, 2006; Houghton et al.,
2006, pp. 3, 4). Indeed, classical studies, like other
disciplines in the humanities, provides open access
to only a tiny fraction of its published research
(Suber, 2005, pp. 234–6). Fifteen years after it
became possible, only eight of the close to a 1,000
journals in our discipline are freely available on
the internet.2 In these circumstances the PSWPC
is clearly helping to meet unmet demand for open-
access scholarship on the ancient world.
So far the success of the PSWPC has been
explained in terms of the contexts of its operation:
the first two reasons for this concern its congruency
with the working arrangements and perceptions of
classical studies, while the third focuses on its
meeting of the global demand for open-access
scholarship. Critically, these reasons relate more to
the means of scholarly communication of which
these pre-prints are an example than they do to
any unique features of the PSWPC itself. Conse-
quently, the success of this experiment strongly
suggests this is a viable form of scholarly commu-
nication in classical studies and that the number of
departments setting up similar series will steadily
increase.3
4.4 The high quality of the working
papers
The last significant reason for the success of the
PSWPC is due to the quality, number, and subject
matter of its offerings. As two of North America’s
wealthiest and most prestigious universities
Princeton and Stanford boast large departments of
classics and some of the world’s foremost ancient
historians and classicists. As a result, their working
papers are generally of a very high standard, contain
important findings and insights, and are very likely
to make it into print. Together the two departments
have been able to make a sizeable number of pre-
prints available, most of which canvass the more
popular subjects and periods of our discipline.
These characteristics go a long way towards
explaining the growing readership of the PSWPC:
it is providing a wide range of academics and post-
graduates timely and free access to up-to-date and
high-quality scholarship on which they can produc-
tively build their own research.
5 Improving the PSWPC Series
Clearly, the PSWPC has proven to be a success and
confirms the viability of pre-prints in classical
studies. After 2 years of operation its creators can
also be given feedback as they mull over its final
form. In particular, they should seriously consider
improving the coordinating of its metadata and
website and the scope of its interoperability. Such
improvements would make the PSWPC easier to use
and increase the positive publicity it brings its
sponsoring departments and the quantity of scho-
larship to which it provides open access.
D. Pritchard
156 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
5.1 Metadata and website
Glitches bedevil the metadata and website of the
PSWPC in its current form. Many of its abstracts are
considerably shorter or longer than the maximum
set extent of 150 words and a proportion do not
summarize their papers satisfactorily. Completeness
and consistency of publication details, felicity of
expression, and spelling remain problems across the
metadata. Technical problems are apparent on the
web page listing the names of authors: some of its
hyperlinks are malfunctioning and this list as a
whole gives access to a smaller number of authors
and working papers than the corresponding drop-
down menu on the home page. The ameliorating of
these issues is important: in contrast to the work-
in-progress papers, this metadata exists only because
of the series and is essential for the wide circulation
of its contents. In addition, we have seen how these
working papers are probably attracting large num-
bers of non-academic readers, for whom they are
presumably serving in many cases as their first
contact with the Princeton and Stanford depart-
ments. Such readers would get a better impression
of the relative standing of these departments if there
were fewer glitches, which could be achieved
through small changes to the work plan of the
PSWPC: its academic coordinators could check the
correctness not only of the formatting of papers but
also their metadata, while its web master might
spend more than the few hours currently being
devoted to site maintenance each week (Ober et al.,
2007, p. 230 n. 5; 231 n. 6).
5.2 Interoperability
Serious redesign of the website is required to ensure
its compliance with the Open Archives Initiative–
Metadata Harvesting Protocol (OAI–MHP), which
is vital for enhancing both the interoperability of
this series and the value of this form of scholarly
communication as it emerges in our discipline. The
initial impetus for this data-sharing protocol arose
again in high-energy physics: in 1999 members of
LANL and other labs met at Sante Fe (New Mexico)
to canvass ways of aggregating the metadata of all
scripts held by disciplinary archives and the growing
number of department-based series so that they
could be browsed more easily (Lynch, 2001).
However, as electronic working papers and other
digital resources had spread into several other
disciplines during 1990s, it was soon apparent
theirs was a challenge which many beyond
high-energy physics also faced. Consequently, in
the following year, a number of research organiza-
tions provided funding for the so-called Open
Archive Initiative (http://www.openarchives.org/).
Headquartered initially at Cornell University, this
group developed the OAI–MHP, a protocol that
basically consists of two parts. Firstly, metadata
needs to be formatted in the 15-element dataset of
Dublin Core, which is the internationally accepted
standard for describing working papers and other
digital resources (Hardwick, 2000, p. 285).
Secondly, the archive they are stored in needs a
web interface, which automatically provides meta-
data via pre-existing hypertext and file-sharing
protocols, whenever requested by another machine.
The integration of the OAI–MHP into archives as
a matter of course has spawned the creation of
so-called metadata-harvesters, such as OAIster
(http://www.oaister.org/), at the University of
Michigan, which ‘deal with all the separate,
compliant archives, as if they formed one grand
virtual archive’ (Suber, 2005, p. 233). At the time of
writing, OAIster has ‘harvested’ the metadata of
some 12 million digital objects from close to 900
repositories worldwide. This protocol also allows
Google Scholar and other commercial search
engines to collect and display systematically the
descriptions of research-related scripts. As a result,
web-users ‘can now find articles in OAI-compliant
archives even if they don’t know which archives
exist, where they are located, or what they contain’
(Suber, 2005, p. 233).
The PSWPC-creators hoped this problem of
fragmented holdings, which are not easy to search
would be avoided if one of our large professional
organizations set up a discipline-wide repository for
working papers, such as arXiv.org, or a website
where different series of pre-prints could be
searched simultaneously (Ober et al., 2007,
pp. 233, 238–41). However, this hope is not partic-
ularly well founded. Firstly, although there are
already a handful of advocates for all-encompassing
repositories in our discipline, working papers will
Working Papers, Open Access, and Cyber-infrastructure
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 157
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
surely need to become much better established
before the American Philological Association, the
Australasian Society for Classical Studies, or some
other professional body commits the resources and
personnel for establishing and maintaining such a
series. Secondly, the aggregating of the metadata of
our pre-prints will only be possible if the PSWPC
and all subsequent department-based series incor-
porate the OAI-MHP. The integration of this
protocol into our pre-print series has the added
advantage of allowing simultaneous searches of our
papers via pre-existing harvesters before any search
engine is set up specifically for classical studies.
6 Concluding Remarks: Towards
Open Access in Classical Studies
Clearly, the PSWPC-creators drew the idea for their
experiment from the communication practices of
social-science departments, which dated back to the
1970s, rather than from more recent developments
in so-called open access (Poynder, 2005). As depart-
ments planning to set up their own series of
electronic scripts will need to take into account
this shift across the research sector towards freer
access to our scholarship, my concluding remarks
focus on the implications of three important
developments of the last several years in this area.
6.1 Increasing availability of post-prints
Open access is formally defined as the making freely
available to every web-user both digital objects and
the copyright permission to download these at a
minimum for personal use (Suber, 2005, p. 231).
Such access was put on the agenda in the mid-1990s
when Stevan Harnad made a well-publicized pro-
posal for scholars to abandon print-based commu-
nication immediately by making as many of their
scripts as possible available in cyberspace (Harnad,
1995). This cognitive scientist from the University
of Southhampton has since become the leading
figure in a loosely organized coalition of academics
and librarians campaigning for free forms of
scholarly communication, which is called the
open-access movement (http://www.eprints.org/
openaccess/). In 2000, this movement successfully
convinced 34,000 scientists to boycott journals,
which refused to give open access to articles
within 6 months of their publication (Kling, 2004,
pp. 591–2). Concerned about the impact of doing
so on their subscriptions, publishers refused to
comply, which ultimately led to the collapse of the
boycott. Since then, however, growing calls for
open access have resulted in many journals giving
a lot of ground. Today around 90% of academic
publishers provides web-based access to journals for
subscribers, while more than 60% allow authors
to make freely available on the net the final versions
of their articles as soon as they are published in
print (Cox, 2006, pp. 273–5).
This new availability of post-prints allows ancient
historians and classicists to take the initiative in
expanding open access to their published research
as long as they have a suitable platform for self-
archiving. The initial performance of the PSWPC
strongly suggests that a department-based series
for electronic scripts would indeed be a viable way
to disseminate published articles on the web: in
general, members of our discipline seem willing to
use such a series for posting and downloading
research-related papers, while it would appear to
increase the impact of research in and outside of
academia.
The setting up of department-based websites for
working papers and post-prints could also help to
breakdown other discipline-specific obstacles to
open access. In contrast to the situation of many
other disciplines a large number of our journals are
published by small professional bodies or individual
departments, whose limited budgets permit few or
no specialist editors (Ober et al., 2007, p. 237).
Consequently, they have found it more difficult
than university or commercial presses to keep apace
of recent changes in scholarly communication.
A case in point is the situation of classical-studies
journals in Australia and New Zealand: of the nine
journals in this region two only have an electronic
version available to subscribers, three allow the self-
archiving of post-prints, five others have no policy
on this, and one rules it out entirely.4 Another
obstacle is that although the journal article is the
most important publication for career-building in
the sciences and social sciences, in the humanities
this role is shared by monographs and edited
D. Pritchard
158 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
collections, out of which publishers seek to make
profits (Suber, 2005, p. 237). As a result, they do not
volunteer to make books freely available in cyber-
space, while we as authors are reluctant to broach
this possibility in view of the benefits accruing to us
from final publication. If a growing number of our
departments set up their own series for working
papers and post-prints, our discipline as a whole
would probably become more fully aware of the
benefits of web and open access. Likely conse-
quences are that smaller publishers of journals
would be asked more and more frequently to
ameliorate their policies on web access and self-
archiving and that increasing numbers of authors
would be emboldened to ask for open access to at
least a portion of their books. In time, these requests
would no doubt expand the proportion of our
published research which is free and online.
6.2 Linking of funding to open access
Departments of classical studies contemplating open
access need to take into account two more recent
developments. The first concerns the move towards
the linking of funding to open access. In the last
few years, governments and funding bodies have
commissioned reports on the pros and cons of
making research funding dependent on the posting
of the results of funded projects in web-accessible
repositories (Suber, 2007a). One such report
by John Houghton, Peter Sheehan, and Colin
Steele was released by Australia’s Department of
Education, Science and Training in September 2006.
The advantages of open access identified in this
report are very similar to the benefits which have
been canvassed for working papers (Houghton
et al., 2006, pp. 31–4). Open access reduces the
unnecessary duplication of research, speeds up the
process of inquiry, and allows researchers to build
more productively on the research of others. By
making research available to those outside of the
small circle with borrowing rights at well-resourced
research libraries, it also improves the quality of
policymaking, the practice of professionals, such as
high-school teachers and doctors, and the knowl-
edge and hence decision-making of the general
public. Among its recommendations are that
national funding bodies make the provision of
open access to funded research compulsory and that
each university introduce a similar policy for the
research every staff member produces (58–60).
Many will be surprised to learn that some of
these recommendations have already been adopted
by the Australian government: the Australian
Research Council (ARC) and the National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) now ask
the researchers they fund to place their data and
results in a disciplinary archive or so-called institu-
tional repository wherever they exist (ARC, 2007).
In addition, both councils require grant-recipients
who do not provide open access to spell out the
reasons for not doing so in their final funding
reports. Although the ARC and NHMRC have not
yet made this self-archiving compulsory, the inten-
sity of competition for their funds, and the required
inclusion of final reports in new grant applications
will ensure a high level of compliance. Moreover, as
Australian universities usually model their own
research policies on the funding rules of these
councils, this new open-access requirement is likely
to lead to internal pressure on academics to deposit
their working papers, post-prints, and digitized data
into university-based archives. This linking of
funding to self-archiving is taking place around
the world: in 2006 alone comparable soft mandates
were introduced by the national funding bodies of
Austria and Germany and the Research Councils of
the United Kingdom (Suber, 2007a). In the United
States of America the National Endowment of the
Humanities now favours grant applications which
promise open access for research results, while
Congress, in spite of serious lobbying from publish-
ers, has recently passed an appropriations bill which
makes funding from the National Institutes of
Health dependent on compulsory self-archiving
(Suber, 2007b).
6.3 New cyber-infrastructure
At first glance, this move to mandated self-archiving
seems another good reason for our departments to
follow the lead of Princeton and Stanford. In
addition to the open-access benefits the PSWPC
confirms, department-based websites for pre-prints
and post-prints would surely help ancient historians
and classicists to meet this new condition of
Working Papers, Open Access, and Cyber-infrastructure
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 159
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
funding. However, the situation is complicated by
the emergence of a new and possibly superior
platform for open access: the institutional reposi-
tory. This is an open-access archive where the
members of a university or research centre can
deposit their working papers, published articles,
and, depending on its software, other research-
related resources (Lynch, 2003). It is usually
managed by a university library, which takes care
of cataloguing and compliance with OAI–MHP and
provides self-archiving academics advice on copy-
right and IT issues. The setting up of a repository
also entails a long-term commitment on the part of
an institution to preserve its contents, which
includes the upgrading of software and the transfer-
ring of data into different formats, once old file
types become obsolete.
This third open-access development was made
possible by a number of events in the early years
of this millennium. In 2002, Raym Crow of the
Washington-based Scholarly Publishing and
Academic Resources Coalition (http://www.arl.org/
sparc/) released an influential paper on the ways
such a platform could catalyse new forms of
scholarly communication and provide to its spon-
soring institution significant benefits in terms of
publicity and research impact (Crow, 2002). Putting
one up had also become feasible because of the new
OAI–MHP, the exponential decline in storage costs,
and the free availability of software for its manage-
ment. In 2002, for example, MIT and the Hewlett
Packard Corporation launched Dspace (http://
www.dspace.org/), which became open-source soft-
ware a year later. Around the same time the
University of Southhampton also made freely
available Eprints (http://www.eprints.org/), which
Harnad had developed for the managing of working
papers and post-prints. Since then a large number of
institutional repositories have been set up: in
Australia nineteen of its thirty-nine universities
now have this cyber-infrastructure.5 The percentage
of universities in North America with repositories
may be lower, but here and elsewhere they are going
live at an increasingly rapid rate (Suber, 2007a).6
This proliferating of institutional repositories
raises serious questions about the best path towards
open access in classical studies. We may have sound
reasons for making our research-related scripts
freely available in cyberspace and be coming under
pressure to do so. But is a departmental website now
a second-best option for open access? Despite the
initial success of the PSWPC, has this platform been
superseded by the university-wide archive? On
balance both of these questions should probably
be answered in the negative. The department-based
series and the institutional repository are not
mutually exclusive and can complement each
other. For some classical-studies departments the
approach taken by the PSWPC-creators will remain
the best means of open access in the short to
medium term, as they wait for their institutions to
set up repositories. For most departments, however,
it is the institutional repository itself, which will
make feasible the circulation of their research-
related scripts in cyberspace. The design of many
pre-existing archives, such as the Sydney
eScholarship Repository (http://ses.library.usyd.
edu.au/), in fact involves departments in the
coordinating of their series. As a Dspace-based
archive the Sydney repository does not accept
submissions directly from individual academics.
Instead, this function is given to each department
or centre of the university wishing to give open
access to their scripts or other digital resources.
The repository supports a department coordinating
such a series by providing for it a plan for work
flow, which guarantees OAI–MHP compliance and
the proper copyediting of metadata before it is
placed on the web. In the repository each depart-
ment gets its own introductory web pages where
statements about the department and its series can
be displayed. Here too web-users can search the
contents of each series by author, date, title, and
customized general subjects.
The Sydney eScholarship Repository gives indi-
vidual departments the infrastructure, work plan,
and technical support to set up their own series of
working papers and post-prints, which have the
same functions as the PSWPC. Admittedly, depart-
ments cannot customize the design of the web pages
this archive gives them. But this open-access service
is provided free of charge and includes an under-
taking to preserve submitted files in perpetuity.
Moreover, if it has the wherewithal, a department
D. Pritchard
160 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
can lay a custom-built website over the repository,
incorporating the metadata, and search options of
the latter and providing hyperlinks to its securely
archived files. As such once Princeton University or
Stanford University sets up an institutional reposi-
tory, the PSWPC-creators could, if they wished,
keep their website but migrate its contents to this
cyber-infrastructure where they would have the
central support they deserve for long-term pre-
servation and OAI–MHP compliance. Finally, the
complementary relationship between these two
platforms is not one way; for department-based
series help solve an ongoing problem with institu-
tional repositories: the reluctance of academics to
use such university-wide initiatives (Houghton
et al., 2006, p. 8; Suber, 2005, pp. 232–3). The
success of the PSWPC in getting a very high rate of
participation among academics demonstrates the
importance of involving departments in open
access. Where the circulation of pre-prints and
post-prints is congruent with discipline-based
perceptions and practices, researchers appear to be
much more willing to be part of a series which is set
up and managed by their own department.
Acknowledgements
For their assistance with the researching of this
article the author would like to thank Lea Beness,
Susanne Binder, Gary Browne, Sten Christensen,
William Dominik, Richard Hamilton, David
Konstan, Donald Mastronarde, Elizabeth Minchin,
Kit Morell, Camilla Norman, Josiah Ober, John
Penwill, Ian Plant, Donna Sanclemente, Walter
Scheidel, Brent Shaw, Colin Steeles and also
Marcus Wilson. He also acknowledges the
valuable comments of this journal’s editor and
her anonymous readers.
References
Addis, L. (2002). Brief and Biased History of Preprint
and Database Activities at the SLAC Library,
1962–1994, SPIRES–HEP. http://www.slac.stanford.
edu/spires/papers/history.html (accessed 24 March
2007).
Australian Research Council (2007). Media Release: ARC
and NHMRC Encourage Access to Research Findings,
Canberra: Australian Government. http://www.arc.
gov.au/media/releases/media_18Jan07.htm (accessed
25 June 2007).
Berkowitz, L. (1993). Ancilla to the Thesaurus Linguae
Graecae: The TLG Canon. In Solomon, J. (ed.),
Accessing Antiquity: The Computerization of Classical
Studies. London and Tucson: University of Arizona
Press, pp. 34–61.
Berners-Lee, T., Cailliau, R., Groff, J.-F., and
Pollermann, B. (1992). World-wide Web: The
Information University. Electronic Networking, 2(1):
52–8.
Brunner, T. F. (1987). Data Banks for the Humanities:
Learning from Thesaurus Linguae Graecae. Scholarly
Communication, 7: 1, 6, 7.
Brunner, T. F. (1993). Classics and the Computer: The
History of a Relationship. In Solomon, J. (ed.),
Accessing Antiquity: The Computerization of Classical
Studies. London and Tucson: University of Arizona
Press, pp. 10–33.
Cox, J. (2006). Scholarly Publishing Practices: A Case of
plus c¸a change, plus c’est la meˆme chose? Learned
Publishing, 19: 273–76.
Crane, G. (2004). Classics and the Computer: An End
of History. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., and
Unsworth, J. (eds), A Companion to Digital Humanities.
Malden, Melbourne, and Oxford: Blackwell Publishing,
pp. 46–55.
Crow, R. (2002). The Case for Institutional Repositories:
A SPARC Position Paper, Washington (DC): Scholarly
Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition. http://
www.arl.org/sparc/bmdoc/ir_final_release_102.pdf
(accessed 12 June 2007).
Doherty, L. (2005). Ancient Times Back in Vogue.
The Sydney Morning Herald, 18 August: 13.
Ginsparg, P. (1994). First Steps towards Electronic
Research Communication. Computers in Physics, 8(4):
390–6.
Hardwick, L. (2000). Electrifying the Canon: the Impact
of Computing on Classical Studies. Computers and the
Humanities, 34: 279–95.
Harnad, S. (1995). The Post-Gutenberg Galaxy: How to
Get There from Here. The Information Society, 11:
285–92.
Hockey, S. (2004). The History of Humanities
Computing. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., and
Working Papers, Open Access, and Cyber-infrastructure
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008 161
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Unsworth, J. (eds), A Companion to Digital Humanities.
Malden, Melbourne, and Oxford: Blackwell Publishing,
pp. 3–19.
Houghton, J., Steele, C., and Sheehan, P. (2006).
Research Communication Costs in Australia: Emerging
Opportunities and Costs. Department of Education,
Science and Training, Canberra: Australian
Government. http://www.dest.gov.au/NR/rdonlyres/
0ACB271F-EA7D-4FAF-B3F7-0381F441B175/13935/
DEST_Research_Communications_Cost_Report_
Sept2006.pdf (accessed 4 May 2007).
Hughes, J. J. (1986). The Ibycus SC: A Multilingual
Computer System for Scholars. Bits and Bytes Review,
1(1): 1–8.
Hughes, J. J. (1987). From Homer to Hesychius: The
Thesaurus Linguae Graecae Project. Bits and Bytes
Review, 1(7): 1–6.
Kling, R. (2004). The Internet and Unrefereed Scholarly
Publishing. Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology, 38: 591–631.
Kling, R. and McKim, G. (2000). Not Just a Matter of
Time: Field Differences and the Shaping of Electronic
Media in Supporting Scientific Communication.
Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 51: 1306–20.
Kreitz, P. A., Addis, L., Galic, H., and Johnson, T.
(1997). The Virtual Library in Action: Collaborative
International Control of High-energy Physics Pre-
prints. Publishing Research Quarterly, 13(2): 24–32.
Lane, B. (2006). Benefits of Free Access, Higher Education
Supplement. The Australian, 18 October: 21–2.
Lynch, C. A. (2001). Metadata Harvesting and the Open
Access Initiative. Association of Research Libraries:
A Bimonthly Report, 217 (August): 1–9.
Lynch, C. A. (2003). Institutional Repositories: Essential
Infrastructure for Scholarship in the Digital Age.
Association of Research Libraries: A Bimonthly Report,
226 (February): 1–7.
Ober, J., Scheidel, W., Shaw, B., and Sanclemente, D.
(2007). Toward Open Access in Ancient Studies:
The Princeton-Stanford Working Papers in Classics.
Hesperia, 76: 229–42.
Packard, D. W. (1973). Computer-assisted
Morphological Analysis of Ancient Greek. In
Zampolli, A. and Calzolari, N. (eds), Proceedings of
the Fifth Conference on Computational Linguistics.
Pisa: Association for Computational Linguistics,
pp. 343–55.
Poynder, R. (2005). OA as Instrumental Good. Open and
Shut?, 22 December. http://poynder.blogspot.com/
2005/12/oa-as-instrumental-good.html (accessed 16
April 2007).
Suber, P. (2005). Promoting Open Access in the
Humanities. Syllecta Classica, 16: 231–46.
Suber, P. (2007a). Open Access in 2006. SPARC Open
Access Newsletter, 105 (2 January). www.earlham.edu/
peters/fos/newsletter/01-02-07.htm (accessed 20 June
2007).
Suber, P. (2007b). More on the Victory in the Senate.
Open Access News: News from the Open Access
Movement, 27 October. http://www.earlham.edu/
peters/fos/2007_10_21_fosblogarchive.html (accessed
19 November 2007).
Notes
1 http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/bmcr/stats/index.html
(accessed 11 November 2007).
2 These are Aigis, BMCR, Didaskalia, Electronic
Antiquity, Frankfurter elektronische Rundschau zur
Altertumskunde, Leeds International Classical Studies,
Rosetta, and Classics@. While the published volumes of
Arachnion and Histos are still available online, these are
no longer going concerns.
3 The first to do so in the United Kingdom was the
Department of Classics at the University of Wales
at Lampeter, whose series of working papers went live
in November 2007 (http://www.lamp.ac.uk/classics/
workingpapers/).
4 Ancient History: Resources for Teachers does not have an
electronic version nor a policy on post-prints. The
same applies to Iris, Mediterranean Archaeology,
Prudentia, and Ramus. Classicum and the Bulletin of
the Australian Centre for Egyptology do allow the self-
archiving of post-prints but lack electronic versions.
Antichthon rules out self-archiving entirely, while its
volumes from 1993 to 2004 are available in electronic
format via a local subscription service. In contrast,
Scholia allows self-archiving, provides open access to its
reviews, and an electronic version of every volume via
Proquest and LOCKSS.
5 http://roar.eprints.org (accessed 15 November 2007).
6 In August 2006 the US-based Association of Research
Libraries (http://www.arl.org/) reported that 43% of its
members had institutional repositories, while some
35% intended to set one up in 2007. Its membership is
restricted to research-intensive US universities and
currently numbers 123.
D. Pritchard
162 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
