
1 Introduction
Digital Humanities may be a relatively young
discipline but it is a very productive one. In its
short history, scholars have produced thousands of
digital resources that have been funded by govern-
ments, philanthropic bodies, and universities. In the
UK alone, over 250 digital humanities projects have
been funded by the Arts and Humanities Research
Council (AHRC)1 since 1998. Yet, what happens to
such resources after completion is very poorly
understood. (Warwick, 1999b) Anecdotal evidence
suggests that some projects become well-known
but others have been relatively quickly forgotten.
Correspondence: School of
Library, Archive and
Information Studies, Henry
Morley Building, University
College London, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT,
UK.
E-mail:
c.warwick@ucl.ac.uk,
m.terras@ucl.ac.uk,
n.pappa@ucl.ac.uk,
p.huntington@ucl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm045 Advance Access Published on 20 November 2007
85
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
This must be regrettable since the non-use of a
resource represents a waste not only of the con-
siderable intellectual effort and time expended in its
production, but potentially considerable amounts of
funding. However, no systematic survey of digital
resource usage in the humanities has been under-
taken, and the characteristics of a project that might
predispose it for sustained use have never been
studied. For example, does the presence in an aca-
demic department of the resource creator, or enthu-
siast, who promotes the use of digital resources,
ensure continued use? Do projects in certain subject
areas tend to be especially widely used? Are certain
types of material, for example, text or images, more
popular? Is a project more likely to be used if it has
communicated with the user community during its
design phase?
This article presents the early results of a study
carried out by the LAIRAH (Log Analysis of Internet
Resources in the Arts and Humanities) project
(http://www.ucl.ac.uk/slais/research/circah/lairah/)2
that is based at UCL’s School of Library Archive and
Information Studies. We are undertaking a fifteen-
month study to discover what influences the long-
term sustainability and use of digital resources in
the humanities through the analysis and evaluation
of real-time use. The LAIRAH project is funded by
the AHRC’s ICT strategy projects scheme that
reports to the AHRC’s strategic review of all ICT-
related activity. Thus our work is highly significant,
since its conclusions will inform the future of
funding for digital humanities in the UK for the
foreseeable future.
This article describes the qualitative and quanti-
tative methods used to analyse use of digital
resources in the humanities during the LAIRAH
project, and provides preliminary results. These
give recommendations for both those about to
create a digital resource in the humanities, and insti-
tutions which may fund those projects, to ensure that
the resulting resource will be as widely used as
possible.
1.1 Previous work in the area
Although useful recent work on humanities
scholars has been done by Barrett (2005), Talja
and Maula (2003), Greene (2000) Herman (2001)
and Ellis and Oldman (2005) this tends to be on the
areas of either information-seeking practices or
information needs of humanities scholars. Seminal
work done by Stone (1982) and Watson-Boone
(1994) showed that humanities users need a wide
range of resources, in terms of their age and type.
This is still true in a digital environment, where
humanities users continue to need printed materials,
or even manuscripts as well as electronic resources,
which by their nature may imply a much greater
age of materials than those used by scientists as
the most recent survey of humanities user needs
showed. (British Academy, 2005) However, only
Bates (1996) has systematically analysed the kind
of activities carried out by humanist scholars in
digital environments, and this work was carried
out on the Dialog system, which predated the web.
Thus, while extremely valuable, it is now somewhat
dated.
Bates’ work and that of Dalton and Charnigo
(2004) and Whitmire (2002) has shown that those
humanities scholars who use digital resources tend
to be demanding of the quality of resources and
are capable of constructing complex search strategies,
given appropriate training. We are not aware,
however, of any literature that has used quantitative
methods, particularly deep log analysis, to measure
the levels of use of digital humanities resources.
Our research presented below is also innovative in
that it attempts to investigate not just which
resources users need, or how they search them, but
their detailed opinions about such resources, such as
the qualities that they appreciate and factors that may
inhibit use. We have therefore combined by quali-
tative and quantitative research methods, to provide
as full a picture as possible of this complex area.
2 Methods
We chose to use Deep Log Analysis as a metric
to assess use levels of digital resources in the arts
and humanities. This is a technique that has been
used extensively by the UCL SLAIS’ CIBER3
research centre in other areas such as health
information and commercial publishing, (for exam-
ple, Huntington et al., 2002) but has never been
C. Warwick et al.
86 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
applied to digital humanities—as far as we are
aware. This analysis allowed us to identify patterns
in the usage of digital resources in the humanities,
and allowed us to present users with a selection
of used and non-used resources. By using quanti-
tative techniques such as Deep Log Analysis, and
qualitative workshop techniques, our knowledge of
which resources were useful or ignored, and why
they were used or neglected, was increased.
2.1 Deep log analysis
All digital information platforms have a facility by
which logs are generated that provides an auto-
matic, real-time record of use. They represent the
digital information footprints of the users and by
analysing them using deep log techniques it is
possible to track their information-seeking behav-
iour. When enhanced, logs can tell us about the
kinds of people that use the services. The attraction
of logs is that they provide abundant and fairly
robust evidence of use. Logs record use by everyone
who engages with the system—there is no need to
take a sample, thus it is possible to monitor the
behaviour of millions of people, around the world.
They not only have an unparalleled size and reach,
but are a direct and immediately available record
of what people have done: not what they say they
might, or would, do; not what they were prompted
to say, not what they thought they did. The data
are unfiltered and represent both the users’
behaviour and complement important contextual
data obtained by engaging with real users and
exploring their experiences and concerns.
Server log data are records of actual web pages
viewed. These records occur as a result of requests
made by the clients’ computer and provide a record
of pages delivered from the web server to the clients’
computer. The client however is not identified by
name or demographics in this process. However,
the server does record the Internet address of the
clients’ computer. These addresses follow an Internet
Protocol (IP) number and relate to registered
domain name server (DNS) information. The DNS
information gives information such as organization
name, organization type (i.e. academic or commer-
cial) and country registration. Neither the DNS
address information nor the IP number records
information that can be used to identify the
actual user. To preserve anonymity further the
logs that we analysed were purged of any persona-
lization data.
The following gives an example of the AHDS log
file:
66.XXX.XXX.XX - - [24/Feb/2005:00:07:12þ
0000] ‘‘GET/deposit/depintro.htm HTTP/1.1’’
200 318 ‘‘http://ahds.ac.uk/copyrightfaq.htm’’
(66.XXX.XXX.XX) is the IP address. (X indicates
the presence of a number that has been removed for
anonymization purposes.) This is an anonymous
machine-to-machine address number used by com-
puters to correctly send and receive data over the
Internet. (24/Feb/2005:00:07:12 þ0000) is a date
stamp and records the date and time of the file sent
in response to the client’s request. (GET/deposit/
depintro.htm) records the file sent to the client and
the directories where the file is stored on the server.
(HTTP/1.1) is the record of the hypertext version
communication between server and client. (200) is
the status field and states if the request was correct
and a file was sent and (318) records the size in
bytes of the file sent. (http://ahds.ac.uk/copyright-
faq.htm) is the referrer log and states the address of
the last site visited by the client.
We used the logs from the three main portals for
digital humanities in the UK, the AHDS4 central
servers, the Humbul Humanities Hub5 and Artifact.6
In the case of the former, we were able to analyse a
year’s worth of data. However, in the case of Artifact
much less was available, due to the fact that they did
not have the technical support to maintain their
own logs. The data from Artifact become available
when it merged with Humbul, but we had only three
months worth and it appeared relatively late in
the project’s life. For the purposes of this article
therefore, we will concentrate on results gained
from the Humbul and AHDS logs. Ideally we would
have liked to use individual logs from the servers of
digital humanities projects. However the project
has a limited scope of fifteen months to allow us to
report to the AHRC’s strategy review. Gathering
together log data even from the three service
providers was a time-consuming process, to do
so from individual projects would have been
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 87
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
unworkable given our deadline. However, this is
something that we would like to do in future work,
given available funding.
Log data is however not a complete method in
itself. We therefore chose to adopt another method
successfully used by CIBER and mounted a ques-
tionnaire on the AHDS, and Humbul websites, and
on that of the RePAH project, in which we asked
about use patterns of resources.7
2.2 Qualitative methods
The use of quantitative methods, primarily analysis
of the log data, enabled us to identify a small
sample of projects that could be studied in greater
depth. We also studied the few projects that had
been mentioned by respondents to questionnaires
hosted by us and by the IHR Peer review project.
(See below for details of this) We also asked those
who work for the AHDS subject centres for their
opinions about which five projects (per centre) were
most frequently used and which five most neglected,
based on the records of requests for data that
they receive. We selected a sample of twenty-five
projects with varying levels of use, and conducted
interviews about them. The interview data, too
extensive to be reported in this article, will be
discussed elsewhere.
2.3 Neglected resources workshop
2.3.1 Choice of resources
We also wished to investigate the reasons why
some projects appeared not to have been well used.
Collecting data about the reasons for neglect of
resources is much more challenging, and thus we
held a workshop whose aim was to present users with
a mixture of used and neglected resources to
determine if there were any factors that users could
identify that might explain the neglect of digital
resources. Adams and Blandford (2002) have shown
that those who do not use digital resources because
they are unaware of their existence may express
satisfaction with and wish to have access to such
resources, once introduced to them. We therefore
wished to test the hypothesis that neglect is caused
by factors other than inherent weaknesses in the
resource itself, such as a simple lack of knowledge
about resources.
Our definition of neglect was that, from the
evidence of the log data and what the AHDS subject
centres told us, users did not appear to be making
links to or requests for such a resource, as opposed to
well-used resources, which were being accessed
repeatedly. We used a mixture of used and neglected
resources, since we did not wish users to be
prejudiced against the quality of resources that
were presented as neglected. For the same reason
we did not tell participants which resources were
which, and chose resources about similar themes,
including such areas as warfare and census data,
which log data indicates were popular areas (see
‘Discussion’ section) The following list was therefore
selected:
Neglected projects:
 Art and Industry in the Eighteenth Century.8
 Collected Poems of Wilfred Owen.9
 Correlates of War Project: International and
Civil War Data, 1816–1992.10
 Exeter Cathedral Keystones and Carvings.11
 Other Educated Persons.12
Accessed projects:
 GIS of the ancient Parishes of England and
Wales, 1500–1850.13
 Imperial War Museum Concise Art Collection.14
 Toronto Dictionary of Old English Corpus.15
 Channel Tunnel Rail Link Archive.16
 Designing Shakespeare.17
 English Monastic Archives.18
2.3.2 Recruitment of participants
A group of twenty participants was recruited to
represent a cross-section of humanities scholarship.
Most had indicated interest in undertaking further
research on questionnaires for various ICT strategy
projects, or were these scholars’ students or collea-
gues. Representatives of the AHDS subject centres
and other digital humanities professionals were also
invited. We wanted participants to be reasonably
comfortable with the use of digital resources, to help
ensure that a negative reaction to a project was not
caused by a lack of confidence in using online
resources.
C. Warwick et al.
88 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
2.3.3 Conduct of the workshop
Each participant had between five and ten minutes
to investigate the resource and note their views of it.
This is a relatively short period. However, recent
research has indicated that users tend to make up
their mind about whether they will use web-based
resources in a remarkably short time (Lindgaard
et al., 2005). Nicholas et al. (forthcoming) have also
discovered that most visitors bounce out of websites
very quickly after entering them. Thus, we wanted
participants to make judgements relatively quickly,
as they might, if they discovered a resource for the
first time, from a web search, library page or subject
portal, and had to decide whether to pursue their
interest any further.
Participants were given a sheet to indicate
their views of each project, on which we asked the
users, whether they had used the resource before;
their views on its quality and possible usefulness in
their research; and whether they would recommend
it to a colleague or student. As a result of the wide
subject coverage some resources were not suitable
for all participants. It was also possible that a
resource might be broadly suitable but not exactly
right for their work (for example, a literary resource
but of the wrong historical period). In this case,
we asked for participants’ opinions on the kind of
resource, even if the exact example was not perfectly
suited to them. Finally, we asked whether partici-
pants thought a resource was used or neglected, and
for the reasons for their conclusion.
3 Results
3.1 Findings from the log data
The first finding emerged from the log research
before we even began analysis of the data. We found
that it is surprisingly difficult to extract log data
even from large government-funded repositories.
As outlined above, Artifact had insufficient technical
help to collect more than basic reports until their
merger with Humbul. We were allowed access
to AHDS central server logs without difficulty.
However, given the distributed nature of the service,
logs are also held by the centres themselves, and
so the data from these logs took longer to access
and organize, and at the time of writing is still being
analysed. The Humbul logs proved difficult and
time-consuming to access, partly because of the
presence of personalization features in Humbul,
which caused concerns that individual users might
be identifiable. It was therefore necessary to enter
into a lengthy period of negotiation to determine
how this data could be removed. We had not
anticipated such problems and they undoubtedly
delayed both our research and that of RePAH.
3.2 Names and subjects
The log data from the AHDS central site showed
which links were being followed on the site itself,
and it was possible to generate a list of pages that
visitors used, which indicated which resources they
were looking for, although in some cases more than
one resource that might be found as a result of a
query. In the case of the Humbul logs it is possible
to identify which resource the user was interested in,
and whether they followed links from a summary
page about the resources, to its own website.
Certain names and themes recurred in the log
data. Warfare, for example, was a common theme,
as was census data and terms relevant to family
history. Place names such as Exeter, Canterbury,
Gloucester, were noticeable in the AHDS data, as
were terms suffrage and suffragette. Witchcraft and
magic produced a large number of links through the
Humbul pages; 53% visits to www.arts.ed.ac.uk
(Edinburgh University), 85% of visits to Greenwich
University’s web page. Other popular areas from the
Humbul logs concerned popular subjects such as
medieval monasticism, the English language and
French Film stars. A project on Jeremy Bentham,19
based at UCL was especially well used, both in
global terms and in relation to the UCL-based
projects. This is understandable given his fame as a
philosopher, and his well-known link to UCL’s
foundation.
Information provided by the AHDS service
providers helped underline this phenomenon.
PADS (the Performing Arts Data Service)20 told us
that Designing Shakespeare is one of their most used
projects. VADS (the visual Arts Data Service)21 told
us that the Imperial War Museum Concise Art
Collection was often requested, as was the London
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 89
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
College of Fashion Archive.22 War, Fashion and
Shakespeare are all very popular subjects of study.
The list of well used and neglected projects provided
by AHDS History demonstrated an interesting
contrast. The Great Britain Historical Database:
Census Data: Occupational Statistics was, unsur-
prisingly, well used but a similar project entitled
Enumerator Returns for County Antrim was
neglected. This suggests that not only the subject
but the name of the resource is significant. The
latter project may not have been found because,
when searching, the more intuitive term to use
is ‘census data’ and not ‘enumerator returns’.
A project archived by VADS called ‘Other
Educated Persons’ is also neglected, from which
title it is almost impossible to infer the content of
the resource. It concerns art in the East End of
London, but the search terms used to retrieve
information on this area would be unlikely to
include the words ‘Other Educated Persons’.
However, information from the service providers
at times contradicted the evidence of the logs.
Literature Languages and Linguistics felt that a
collection of Wilfred Owen’s poetry was little used.
Yet, the AHDS logs showed the term ‘Wilfred’
relatively high on the list of pages viewed. Visual arts
felt that the Exeter Cathedral Keystones and
Carvings Project was seldom used, nevertheless the
term ‘Exeter’ was significant in the list of pages
visited. (Although we cannot be certain that this
refers to the same project).
3.3 Names and resource description
Regardless of the usefulness of the subject matter,
the issue of naming and description of a resource
is important, if potential users are to understand
what it may be used for. In the arts and humanities,
print publications often have witty, unusual
and eye-catching titles, partly to attract the readers’
attention and pique curiosity as to their contents.
In the case of a book or article title, there is usually
an elucidation of meaning after a colon, so for
example, ‘If you build it will they come?’ is
explained by the rest of our article title, which
allows readers to comprehend its subject matter.
However, in the case of digital resources an
unimaginative but accurate description is more
advisable. While humanities scholars have complex
models of information processing in the world of
print, these are not yet as easily transferred to
the digital realm. (Buchanan et al., 2005; Blandford
et al., forthcoming). Thus users find it easier to
guess the contents of print publications, given their
greater experience of them, but find it much harder
to guess the contents, purpose and scope of digital
resources. Therefore, if a user is browsing a digital
collection and finds a resource whose title does not
accurately describe it, they may become confused,
and discouraged, and may not explore any further.
(See the results of the workshop, described subse-
quently). We must therefore be aware of the need
to provide signposts for humanities users of
digital resources, the most obvious of which is the
project title.
3.4 The importance of information
resources
The respondents to the questionnaire were
enthusiastic about the usefulness of digital resources
(Figs 1 and 2). Our respondents were regular users,
89% of whom used the web every day, and 40%
for more than four hours per day. Eighty-one
percent identified themselves as extensive users of
digital resources, 83% either agreed or strongly
agreed that they could not do their work without
digital resources. Seventy-seven percent of them
agreed or strongly agreed with the statement that
digital resources had changed the way that they did
their research (Fig. 3).
In order not to influence users too much we
decided not to offer a definition of digital resources.
Instead, we asked them to list their three favourite
resources. We found that most users perceive digital
resources not to be specialist research resources for
humanities scholarship, but generic information
resources. This is supported by previous work
carried out by Sparke Jones and the UCIS project
(British Academy, 2005; Rimmer et al. 2006).
A wide range of resources were mentioned, but
the most popular was the university library web site,
which 14% of the users identified as the most
important resource. Google, in comparison, gained
8% of the votes.
C. Warwick et al.
90 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Many different resources are classified as ‘other’
in Fig. 4. The vast majority of them are what might
be termed information resources or gateways, such
as libraries, archives and subject portals, whether
these are publicly funded or commercial. For
example, the British Library,23 the National
Library of Scotland,24 the National Archives,25
JSTOR,26 the AHDS or Humbul, SOSIG,27
Digital resources have changed the way that I do my research
40.94%
35.57%
14.09%
4.03% 2.01% 3.36%
1 65432
1=Strongly agree 5=Strongly disagree 6=Not applicable
Fig. 3 Digital resources and research
I use digital resources extensively in my academic work
51.68%
29.53%
14.77%
3.36% 0% 0.67%
1 65432
1=Strongly agree    5=Strongly disagree    6=Not applicable
Fig. 1 Use of Digital resources
I could not do my academic work without access to digital resources
61.07%
654321
21.48%
11.41%
4.70% 1.34% 0%
1= Strongly agree 5=Strongly disagree 6=Not applicable
Fig. 2 Impact of digital resources
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 91
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Literature Online,28 and the e-DNB.29 Specialist
subject centres like Palatine30 were also mentioned,
and privately constructed information portals such
as Voice of the Shuttle31 and the ORB,32 as well as
subject-based digital libraries such as Perseus.33 It
therefore appears that most of our users regard
digital resources primarily as a way to access infor-
mation, which in the analogue world might be
compared to the library or archive, rather than spe-
cialist research resources which we might compare
to a monograph or a literary text for primary study.
It is significant that most resources fall into the
‘other’ category, which suggests that there is a very
wide range of resources being used, and very little
agreement as to which are most useful. This under-
lines the diversity of humanities research. Thus, in
the case of content as well as interface it is naı¨ve
to suppose that one size will fit all, unless we are
discussing generic resources like library catalogues.
It is therefore inevitable that only a few digital
resources available will be suitable for any given
scholar—as is the case for example with print
journals, where a medieval economic Historian
would be most unlikely to read the Journal of
American Studies. It may therefore be that for the
foreseeable future generic resources suit the needs of
the majority of humanities scholars, because the
specialist resources have not yet been created.
This finding is supported by our log data
especially from Humbul, where we found numerous
links to information sites. From the logs we
generated a list of the forty top-level domains that
were accessed.
Half of the domains listed in Table 1 are for sites
of libraries, archives, e-text collections, portals, or
publishers. We then extracted details of the sub-
directories belonging to the UK universities in this
list: in order of popularity, Edinburgh, Sheffield,
UCL, Greenwich and the School of Advanced Study
Table 1 Top forty resource sites accessed via Humbul
URI site Number Percentage
www.bbc.co.uk 4166 1.5
www.wsu.edu 2473 .9
www.geocities.com 1969 .7
www.nd.edu 1517 .6
ads.ahds.ac.uk 1216 .4
www.bl.uk 1047 .4
www.arts.ed.ac.uk 1042 .4
www.pbs.org 1031 .4
www.emule.com 936 .3
memory.loc.gov 836 .3
www.fordham.edu 813 .3
www.shef.ac.uk 811 .3
www.channel4.com 789 .3
www.newadvent.org 713 .3
www.llgc.org.uk 680 .3
www.spartacus.school 659 .2
www.luminarium.org 659 .2
etext.lib.virginia.e 649 .2
uk.cambridge.org 643 .2
www.ucl.ac.uk 636 .2
www.iwm.org.uk 624 .2
www.loc.gov 614 .2
ccat.sas.upenn.edu 606 .2
www.gre.ac.uk 599 .2
www.archives.gov.on. 575 .2
www3.oup.co.uk 573 .2
www.archives.gov 563 .2
www.accd.edu 560 .2
www.nationalarchives 559 .2
www.georgetown.edu 546 .2
www.hti.umich.edu 540 .2
www.sas.ac.uk 536 .2
www.kb.nl 520 .2
etext.virginia.edu 506 .2
www.bu.edu 504 .2
www.stoa.org 503 .2
history.hanover.edu 499 .2
raven.cc.ku.edu 490 .2
learningcurve.pro.go 485 .2
www.17thc.us 479 .2
12.6%
Fig. 4 Most useful digital resources
C. Warwick et al.
92 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(University of London). Information resources were
again high on the list of resources linked to. Almost
all of the School of Advanced Study pages were for
the web pages of subject research centres, such as the
Warburg Institute, and the Commonwealth
Institute. Three of the most popular resources at
Edinburgh (29% altogether) were the Centre for the
History of the Book (second) the Dictionary of the
Older Scots Tongue—(fifth), and the Edinburgh
Journal of Gadda Studies. (The last two sites do not
give access to the resource, but information about
it). At Sheffield, six such resources were present in
the log data, Assemblage (an archaeology journal),
which was the second most popular resource, The
Association for Low Country Studies, CAPRA—an
archaeology journal, The Centre for the Study of the
English Cultural Tradition, The International Band
Dessinee Society, and the Hegel Society of Great
Britain.
The questionnaire recipients identified only
three UK-funded research projects: The Old Bailey
Online,34 the PARIP project,35 and the Powys Digital
History Project.36 There were also two further USA-
funded research project, the CHILDES corpora37
website and the Perseus digital library—both of
which are information aggregation and reference
sites, and the Photographic Exhibitions in Britain
site, which is, perhaps oddly, Canadian funded
although it is archived by VADS. The same question,
asked by the IHR ICT Strategy programme study on
Peer Review obtained similar results; in this case, the
Old Bailey Online was the only publicly funded
project mentioned. This does not mean that
respondents never use specialist digital resources,
since we only asked about the three most commonly
used, but they obviously do not use such resources as
frequently as information aggregators, portals and
libraries, whether digital or physical.
3.5 Creation versus reuse
Most of the pages viewed on the AHDS website, and
those highest in the frequency list, concerned
deposit and creation such as ‘how to deposit’, staff
contact details, and information about issues such
as copyright. However, this is contradicted by the
views of those who use digital resources, since our
questionnaire data indicates that only a minority of
users (32%) believed that data archiving was central
to their research (Fig. 5).
It is possible therefore that there is a scholarly
bifurcation between those who create specialist
digital resources as part of their research, but do
not tend to reuse those of others, and those who
prefer to use more generic information resources,
but are less concerned with deposit and archiving.
3.6 Academic versus commercial users
Analysis of the logs showed whether users visited
from an academic domain or from a commercial
ISP. This must be treated with some caution, since if
Is data archiving once your research is complete central to your work?
16.11% 16.11%
654321
22.82% 22.15%
12.75%
10.07%
1=Central 5=Peripheral 6=Not applicable
Fig. 5 Data archiving as part of research
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 93
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
an academic user is accessing resources from home
and not using a proxy server, they will be counted as
using a commercial ISP. Nevertheless, we found that
academic users tended to be more persistent in
their information-seeking patterns. While those
using an ISP and commercial users were most
likely to view just one page in a session (63 and 60%
did so) academic users were least likely to do so,
although 54% of them only viewed one page,
academics were recorded as having longer sessions;
31% had sessions lasting over three minutes
compared to 21% of commercial session users and
19% ISP-based sessions. Academic users tended to
persist in their search. They were least likely simply
to use an external search engine, and tended to use a
combination of the on site search facility, navigation
menus and browsing. As a result, they tended not
only to access the summary information about a
resource, but to make a link to the resources itself:
thirty-nine percent of those who used a combina-
tion of methods (which academics were more likely
to do) linked to a resource, as opposed to 25% of
those who used a search engine.
3.7 Workshop findings
3.7.1 Recruitment
Our first significant finding was the relative
difficulty of recruiting participants. We contacted
people who were either known to the research group
as users of digital resources, or those who had
replied to surveys indicating an interest in further
research. While Digital Humanities professionals
were eager to take part, university lecturers were
harder to recruit. We initially tried to recruit a
mixture of Humanities Computing professionals
and traditional academics, and to keep a balance
between subject specialists. However, this proved
impossible. Many of the academics did not reply to
our (repeated) email invitations, and in a notable
case reacted with hostility and a demand for
payment. We therefore accepted all those who
were interested enough to volunteer. This meant a
potential lack of subject balance, with a population
skewed towards historians and archaeologists,
graduate students and Humanities Computing
professionals.
This problem may have been caused by a simple
lack of time on the part of busy academics. However,
it may also be evidence of a lack of interest, or
perhaps confidence, in the use of digital resources
amongst the mainstream academic profession. Had
the subject matter been of genuine interest it is likely
that more academics would have been keen to
participate. There was also a marked contrast with
the response from those whom were interviewed
about their research projects, who in most cases
replied swiftly and made time to talk to our research-
ers. The latter were to some extent digital enthusiasts,
since they had directed the development of a digital
research project. This supports the impression of
a divide between the enthusiastically digital (who
appear to be a minority) and the majority of the
academic profession. This is worrying, since there
is a danger that Digital Humanities may therefore
become ghettoized rather than further integrated
into scholarship.
3.7.2 Lack of confidence
Many participants, especially those from a more
traditional humanities background showed a marked
reluctance to commit themselves as to the quality
and usefulness of resources, especially in areas in
which they were not subject specialists. Although we
made it clear that all findings would be anonymized
and that we particularly wanted to know their views
about whether and why a resource was used, some
still preferred to say they did not know, or not to
provide further comments. This suggests a lack of
confidence in expressing views about digital
resources; especially in areas where participants
were not specialist, or resources they had not so far
encountered. One participant even argued that it was
wrong of us to offer opinions or judge the work of
others in this way. Yet, it is likely that s/he will do so
when reviewing a book in a scholarly journal,
examining a PhD or refereeing articles for publica-
tion. However, these activities are a familiar part of
the analogue scholarly world and it appears that
digital resources are still too remote from the
experience of the majority of humanities academics
for them to feel confident in their opinions of them.
This may be explicable by reference to the Wundt
Curve (Fig. 6), which is a concept from psychology
C. Warwick et al.
94 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
which seeks to model the relationship between
familiarity and pleasure (Saunders and Gero, 2004).
This theory argues that when something is
very unfamiliar we tend to dislike it because of the
cognitive effort necessary to comprehend the concept
or enjoy something like an unusual art work or
musical composition. However, if we are too familiar
with something we do not enjoy it because there is
too little cognitive effort involved, and thus the con-
cept or object becomes banal. Ideally, there should be
enough cognitive difficulty to stimulate the brain
without overstretch or boredom. It is arguable there-
fore that for most humanities academics, specialist
digital humanities research resources are too unfa-
miliar, and thus this causes them to feel uncomfor-
table and unwilling either to use them or to express
opinions about them. Whereas informational mate-
rial, journals and subjects centres, even if accessed by
a web page, are sufficiently familiar that they are
more easily comprehensible, and place the user at a
more optimal point on the curve. To test this
hypothesis, we ran the workshop again with a group
of MA students from UCL SLAIS, all of whom are
familiar with digital humanities resources. We will
report in the findings in detail elsewhere, but they
were more confident in offering opinions of the
resources, as compared with the first group.
3.7.3 Critical judgement
Participants were highly critical of the resources
offered, and none met with universal enthusiasm
or approval. Even in cases where a resource might
be useful for their work, participants provided
informed critiques of its strengths and weaknesses.
Participants tended to assume that a resource was
not used, and thus identified half of the used
resources as neglected. This was perhaps the
opposite result from what we had expected, since
we had assumed that if shown resources of good
quality, they might recognize them as potentially
useable, even if not for their personal research.
Problems noted by the participants concerned
content, interface, and ease of use. They recognized,
and indeed required high-quality resources, and
tended to find resources that do not live up to this
standard disappointing. This may particularly be
because, as the questionnaire data showed, many of
the resources that participants used most regularly
are commercially produced, and thus the content
and interface are usually of a high standard. On the
evidence of this sample, users seem unwilling to
allow for any lesser standards, even if they know a
resource is not commercially produced.
There were exceptions to this, for example, in
the case of ‘Other Educated Persons’. Participants
tolerated the rather old-fashioned interface and
limited scope of the resource as it was clear that it
was a Masters student’s project of a relatively early
date that would have been quite radical for its time
in terms of its subject matter and functionality.
They therefore saw it almost as a historical object
that should be preserved for its own sake, and not
necessarily as something that might be reused.
3.7.4 Names
Names proved to be significant to workshop par-
ticipants, especially as a way of providing clues to the
resource’s purpose and provenance. For example,
some participants were uncertain about the contents
of the Channel Tunnel Rail Link Archive. Although it
is a collection of records of Archaeological digs along
the route of the rail link for the channel tunnel, some
of the participants assumed it might be about railway
engineering. They therefore concluded that it might
not be used, because its purpose was not obvious.
Participants also commented favourably on
naming, in the case, for example, of the Imperial
War Museum Concise Art Collection. Its name
Pleasure
Low Complexity High Complexity
Fig. 6 The Wundt Curve
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 95
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
described the resources accurately and the Imperial
War Museum also provided the reassurance of a
trusted brand, reassuring them about the quality of
the resources. This was one of the main reasons that
they identified the Concise Art Collection as well
used, and confirms previous findings about the
importance of trusted brands on the internet, such as
the BBC for provision of news. (BBC, 2006)
A participant who was a Digital Humanities
professional objected to this emphasis on names as
a descriptor, and insisted that metadata such as
that provided by the AHDS would give users ample
information about the purpose of the resource.
Nevertheless, other participants observed that if a
name was confusing, they might not be motivated to
look at any further details.
The participants also commented on subject
matter as a potential reason for neglect. They sug-
gested that the Exeter Cathedral Carvings Project, for
example, might not be well used because the subject
might only be of interest to a minority of scholars.
Conversely, they were reasonably confident that
the Designing Shakespeare project would be used
because of its popular subject matter. Nevertheless,
they also expressed concern that resources that were
well regarded and used in a small community should
not therefore be seen as inferior to those that were
relatively superficially used by a larger community.
3.7.5 Metadata and citation
Several participants raised doubts about the quality
of the content, for example, their only reservation
about the Monastic Archives project was that it is
still incomplete. This caused some participants to
worry about how reliable searches of it might be.
However, they welcomed the fact that the team
had been clear about the state of their data. Par-
ticipants were worried nevertheless that there was
insufficient evidence about the provenance of the
data for several resources. One participant who
was an archivist worried that in many cases it
was difficult to identify where original data had
come from, and the methodology for selection and
digitisation. S/he would have welcomed more
information of the kind that in print is provided
by citations and bibliographies.
3.7.6 Access problems
Participants found that anything that made it hard
to access a resource was unwelcome and could deter
them from using it. They also found that interfaces
that helped them to manipulate the data were
welcome.
Judging by the metadata, the data sets in history
were all thought to be little used because it is so
difficult to access the actual resources. We did not ask
users to access the data in the workshop, but some
more expert users tried, and found that the process of
gaining permission to use resources, applying for
passwords and downloading the data was difficult
and time-consuming, and thus a deterrent to use.
As a result, the GIS of the Ancient parishes of
England and Wales was thought to be neglected,
although it is one of the most popular resources held
by AHDS History.38
In contrast, participants liked the interface to
the Monastic Archives project, because the initial
screen was simple and easy to use, and its subject
matter obvious. The next page contained multiple
search boxes to aid users to search the database.
Thus, the process of accessing and interrogating
historical data was made as simple as possible. One
historian argued that the downloaded data from the
rejected data sets could be interrogated in a more
complex way than that which is allowed by the
front-end to the Monastic archives. However, it was
necessary to be an expert user to do so.
3.7.7 Interfaces
The interfaces to the material were very varied.
In general, we tried to link to the view of a resource
that a users would be presented with if accessing it
through the AHDS. However, as one participant
noted, the same, or very similar data can be viewed
differently if searched for directly though Google.
For example, we chose the Wilfred Owen poetry
collection because we knew it to be a popular
subject matter—concerning warfare, and by a
widely known writer. However, the form in which
it was presented was unattractive and limited. One
of the reasons for lack of use may be that there is no
information about which edition of the poems has
been used, which is important to academic users.
However, another reason for neglect may be that
C. Warwick et al.
96 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
there is an attractive, usable electronic edition of
Wilfred Owen’s poems, which can be accessed via
http://www.hcu.ox.ac.uk/jtap/. This also provides
information about the edition used, and manuscript
sources, as well as being part of a much larger
multimedia archive on Owen. It is therefore likely
that this resource is being used in preference to the
AHDS editions because of its superior content and
functionality.
Given that one of the most attractive and useful
interfaces, belonging to the Imperial War Museum
Concise Art Collection, was designed by the AHDS
Visual Arts Data service and not the project itself;
we discussed who should be responsible for inter-
faces. Projects themselves might not have access to
the design expertise possessed by AHDS centres, and
one of the AHDS representatives expressed the view
that allowing projects to design their own interfaces
could create potential problems when resources
were deposited, and for potential users, because of
variations in functionality and ease of use. However,
s/he felt that the AHDS centres themselves did not
have sufficient expertise about the project contents
to design interfaces to them, and that one size could
not be expected to fit all. The ideal arrangement
would therefore be for projects to work much more
closely with the AHDS to design interfaces, which
has happened in the case of some archaeological
projects, who have paid ADS (Archaeology Data
Service) to design an interface for them. VADS staff
also stressed their willingness to work more closely
with project creators, but told us that they typically
have little contact with resource creators between
the initial proposal being approved and the final
deposit of the resource.
3.7.8 Importance of the material
Respondents made clear that the factors described
above might deter them from using a resource if
they were unfamiliar with it, and not certain of its
value to their work. However, they stressed that if
they already know that such a resource would be
vital to them, or if it were the only such resource
available they would be likely to use it despite the
potential problems or disadvantages. For example,
linguistic corpora are vital to linguists and thus the
participants thought that the York Toronto Corpus
would be widely used, because of the nature of the
resource. They pointed out that the interface was
not especially attractive, but that it had the func-
tionality necessary to make it usable, and thus there
would be no real obstacle to a linguist who wanted
to use it.
4 Conclusions and
Recommendations
4.1 Log availability
Many of our conclusions are relevant to both the
findings of the log data and the workshop. However,
our first conclusion relates to the importance of log
data itself. Our research shows that log data is
potentially a valuable research resource, however, it
is often undervalued and not maintained or made
available. We recommend as a result that publicly
funded centres and research projects should be
under an obligation to maintain log data for an
agreed minimum period, for example, three years.
Sufficient funding should also be made available
to hire technical support to maintain the log data
and make it available to publicly funded research
projects, subject to a written agreement with the
research centre or project. If necessary there should
be the provision for a confidentiality clause, spec-
ifying that individuals may not be identified in
published research output. This would remove the
need for complex anonymization of log data.
4.2 Nomenclature
The importance of naming and description of
projects emerged from both the logs and the work-
shop, and appears to be a significant factor in
determining whether a resource is used. It may seem
obvious that resources addressing popular subject
matter tend to be used more than those on more
obscure subjects; however, it is potentially signifi-
cant in terms of future research funding. There are
also undoubtedly excellent projects whose subject
matter is highly specialist and not well known
outside the immediate research community. Yet,
they may be vital to the work of that research field.
When deciding on issues of funding, this kind
of use must be weighed against the likelihood that
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 97
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a resource on a popular subject is more likely to be
re-used although its use might be broad and
shallow. For example, we do not know whether
the witchcraft resources are being used by fans of
Buffy the Vampire Slayer rather than for research
on seventeenth-century popular culture. There is
also a danger of a kind of ‘electronic canon’ being
formed, (as Warwick predicted in 1999) where
less well-known authors or subjects are marginal-
ized by yet more census data and Shakespeare.
(Warwick, 1999a) Funding bodies must therefore
make decisions about the value of study of more
recherche´ topics. In effect, they must develop the
sense of collection building that has hitherto been
the concern of librarians in the print world.
It is equally important that we recognize the
value of experimental research, where a resource is
created to test a technical or intellectual issue in
knowledge representation. This kind of conceptual
research is valuable, and it may be that no reuse can
be envisaged. However, when bidding for money to
produce digital resources those who propose their
creation may suggest that they will be widely used,
in order to justify the level of funding sought.
To draw a clear distinction between material
intended for a wide audience and that created to
solve a research question it might be possible to ask
for more evidence of usage, or to make it clear that
for ‘pure research’ projects re-use should not
necessarily be a prerequisite for funding.
The actual name of a resource also emerged as
vital and potential resource creators must be aware
of the importance of what they decide to call their
resource, since it may have a profound effect on its
future use or neglect. Although metadata can help to
describe a resource, it appears that non-expert users
may not progress as far as accessing this. It is also
important to stress the importance of organizations
like universities, museums, libraries, and archives
brand names that users trust to produce good-
quality resources.
4.3 Information resources
The preference amongst users for information
resources over specialist research resources has
various consequences. In terms of funding prio-
rities, it suggests projects which collect together
large collections of information resources for
reference, whether generic or subject based are
likely to be well used. Our findings also demonstrate
the importance of traditional scholarly structures
in humanities research and the use of the web
for information about journals and academic
conferences. This confirms Barrett’s (2005) findings
that humanities users still need traditional, generic
resources and value personal knowledge repositories
and face-to-face meeting as highly as digital
resources.
It also underlines the importance of physical
information resources such as libraries, archives, and
research centres. Access to research centres, such as
those at the School of Advanced Study is obviously
still very significant in the research of humanities
scholars. However, more attempts might be made to
integrate their physical function with that of a digital
mission, following the example of the IHR (Institute
of Historical Research)39 in London and the HRI
(Humanities Research Institute)40 in Sheffield. Uni-
versity libraries are the primary point of access for
digital resources for many users, and national and
specialist libraries and archives are also highly valued.
Digital resources have also not replaced the library as
an important research resource. If anything, their
function as information gateways have increased
their importance. It is therefore vital that they should
be funded appropriately and that funding for digital
resources should not therefore be diverted from
library and archive budgets.
In a separate study (Pappa et al., 2006), we have
tried to find specialist digital resources for huma-
nities research, beginning with either the depart-
mental home page or the university library.
We found it relatively hard to find such resources,
even for an expert information seeker. This might
help to explain why so many of the resources being
used are information collections, as it may be that
these are the kind of resources that librarians, as
information specialists themselves, consider most
valuable, and therefore create links from the library
web page to them. Thus, the users tend to follow the
links provided. If these do not include specialist
digital humanities resources users may not look
further for them, since they trust the judgement of
librarians. It is therefore important that librarians
C. Warwick et al.
98 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
should be aware of specialist digital research
resources and to provide links from the library
site. This may require more specialist training for
subject librarians, which suggests that modules on
electronic publishing and digital resources in the
humanities should be available to library school
students, as is the case at UCL SLAIS. For mid-
career professionals it might be possible to pride
training in collaboration with organizations like the
AHRC Methods Network41 a body set up to help
disseminate information about the use of digital
resources in the UK Higher education research
community.
4.4 Critiques of digital resources
Humanities scholars are capable of providing
detailed, informed critiques of digital resources.
They demand the highest possible quality, both in
terms of content and interface and may be relatively
easily deterred from using digital resources if they are
not convinced of their value. They therefore assumed
that more resources were neglected than was actually
the case, and this was generally a judgement made
as a result of their concerns about resource quality.
This may be because users have become accustomed
to the kind of high quality content and interfaces
that is provided by commercial publishers or organi-
zations like large libraries and archives, and are
disappointed when resources produced by academic
teams do not appear to match such standards. This
has important implications for the creators of
specialist digital resources, since it is clear that to
the majority of users, inherent scholarly value is not
generally a compensation for a digital resource that is
produced to lower standards than those used by
commercial organizations.
In terms of content, users require as much infor-
mation as possible about the quality and provenance
of a resource and whether or not it is comprehensive
in coverage. Users may find it difficult to compre-
hend the extent and coverage of digital resources
since they lack the clues that we are used to in the
physical world. Scholars can browse a library shelf
or journal issues and quickly determine the approx-
imate extent of the resources available, and thus be
sure that they do not miss anything important,
but this is much far difficult in the case of
digital resources. This concern was also found by
Bates (1996) when she interviewed scholars using
the Getty project resources, and has also been noted
by Duff et al. (2004) and Dalton and Charnigo
(2004) when studying historians. It is clearly
therefore a long-standing problem which is far
from being solved. However, it is relatively easy for
producers to provide information about the source
of the material and how it was selected. It is
therefore important that producers of electronic
resources should make clear the source of their data
and their methodology for digitizing and marking it
up, and that this should be easily accessible from the
web page of the actual resource as well as with data
deposited with the AHDS. The extent of the
resource should also be indicated, especially if it is
selective or incomplete. An excellent example of this
is the Powys Digital History Project, where this kind
of documentation is available directly from their
website and written in easily understood, non-
technical language.
For most users, ease of access is vital and the
more hindrances placed in the path of a potential
user the more likely it is that they will give up and
not access the resource. A front end that makes data
more easily manipulable is also very welcome. Users
are clearly aware that one of the great assets of
digital resources is to enable users to manipulate
data in different ways. If this potential is limited, or
relies on the use of separate software, scholars
may be deterred from using the resource. Producers
of digital resources must be aware of how easily
deterred a user may be from using any given
resource. Thus unless necessitated by copyright
regulations, registration screens or similar hin-
drances to access should be avoided if at all possible.
Resources should be designed to help users
manipulate data directly from the web interface, to
avoid users having to download and use it with
separate software.
4.5 Interfaces
If an interface compares badly to the kind of
professional front end that scholars are accustomed
to from commercial products, this immediately
creates an adverse impression on potential users.
However, at present it appears that the issue of the
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 99
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
design of interfaces to digital humanities material
is managed in a somewhat random fashion. If a
project is lucky enough to benefit from a good
designer, then the interface may be very good;
however, it seems as if many projects do not take
this aspect of their work as seriously as the design
of the back-end materials themselves. Yet, if the
interface makes it hard to access such material, a
great deal of effort in its creation may be wasted.
One participant at the second workshop likened
this to producing an expensive car but neglecting
to provide a steering wheel, thus rendering it
impossible to drive. To remedy this situation,
project creators must be aware of the importance
of good interface design and spend sufficient time
on developing and testing interfaces, perhaps bring-
ing in expert advice. This activity must also be cost
appropriately in terms of time and funding. Another
interesting possibility is to encourage much
more collaboration with the AHDS in interface
construction, although at present there is insuffi-
cient funding to allow this to be done on a
significant scale.
4.6 Summary
We have seen that in some cases, when scholars
are aware that a resource is vital for their work, or
they cannot access information without digital
resources, they are willing to be extremely persistent
and grapple with difficult interfaces and barriers
to access to get the data that they need. The log data
shows that users from academic domains tended to
be more persistent and use different search strategies
to reach their goals. This is important, since
it suggests that academics are keen to find and
potentially to use certain resources. Nevertheless, we
would argue that the kind of scholar who is likely to
know they need such a resource and persist until
they find it is the kind of early adopter who is
already using specialist digital resources. If funding
bodies wish to increase the take-up of resources,
then they need to urge producers to take into
account the kind of barriers to adoption that
are described above, since these are likely to be
off-putting to the less determined user, who is likely
to represent the majority of humanities scholars.
As we have shown, where resources fit the needs
of the research community, as in the case of infor-
mation aggregation sites, scholars will enthusiasti-
cally adopt digital resource use. However, at present
too many digital resources require users either to
struggle with unfriendly interfaces or to be technical
experts even to begin to use them. It is also impor-
tant to realize that humanities users are highly
critical of the quality of research resources them-
selves, thus content must not only be of excellent
quality, but must advertise this fact, by making clear
what kind of material it contains and how this has
been selected. If producers of digital resources can
satisfy these entirely reasonable scholarly require-
ments in their building of resources, encouraged by
the appropriate requirements specified by research
councils, then we may be far more optimistic that
the users will adopt digital resources for humanities
research.
References
Adams, A. and Blandford, A. (2002). Digital Libraries
in Academia: Challenges and Changes. In E.-P. Lim,
S. Foo, C. Khoo, H. Chen, E. Fox, S. Urs and
T. Costantino (eds), Digital Libraries: People,
Knowledge, and Technology: 5th International Confer-
ence on Asian Digital Libraries, ICADL 2002, Singapore,
December 11–14, 2002. Proceedings. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science: Vol. 2555. Berlin/Heidelberg:
Springer, pp. 392–403.
Barrett, A. (2005). The information seeking habits
of graduate student researchers in the humanities.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(4): 324–31.
Bates, M. J. (1996). The Getty end-user online searching
project in the humanities: Report no. 6 Overview and
conclusions. College and Research Libraries, 57(6):
514–23.
BBC (2006) Media holds its own in trust poll, available
at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/4965550.stm.
(Accessed on 30 June 2006).
British Academy (2005). E-resources for Research in the
Humanities and Social Sciences - A British Academy
Policy Review. Section 3.5 Available from http://
www.britac.ac.uk/reports/eresources/report/
sect3.html#part5. (Accessed on 30 June 06).
C. Warwick et al.
100 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Buchanan, G., Cunningham, S. J., Blandford, A.,
Rimmer, J., and Warwick, C. (2005) Information
Seeking by Humanities Scholars. Proceedings of European
Digital Library Conference, September 18–23, Vienna,
Austria, Springer Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Volume 3652, pp. 218–29.
Dalton, M. S. and Charnigo, L. (2004). Historians and
their information sources. College & Research Libraries,
65(5): 400–25.
Duff, W., Craig, B., and Cherry, J. (2004). ‘Historians’
use of archival sources: promises and pitfalls of the
digital age. Public Historian, 26(2): 7–22.
Green, R. (2000). Locating sources in humanities scholar-
ship: The efficacy of following bibliographic references.
Library Quarterly, 70(2): 201–29.
Herman, E. (2001). End-users in academia: meeting the
information needs of university researchers in an
electronic age Part 2 Innovative information-accessing
opportunities and the researcher: user acceptance of IT-
based information resources in academia. ASLIB
Proceedings, 53(10): 431–57.
Huntington, P., Nicholas, D., Williams, P., and
Gunter, B. (2002). Characterising the health
information consumer: an examination of the health
information sources used by digital television users.
LIBRI, 52(1): 16–27.
Lindgaard, G., Dudek, C., Fernandes, G., and Brown, J.
(2005). Attention web designers: you have 50 milli-
seconds to make a good first impression. Behaviour &
Information Technology, 25: 115–26.
Makri, S., Blandford, A., Gow, J., Rimmer, J., Warwick,
C. and Buchanan, G. (2007) A library or just an
information resource? Users’ mental models of tradi-
tional and digital libraries. Journal of the American
Society of Information Science and Technology, 58(3):
433–45.
Nicholas, D., Huntington, P., Jamali, H., and
Dobrowolski, T. (2007) Characterising and evaluating
information seeking behaviour in a digital (consumer)
environment: spotlight on the ‘‘bouncer’’. Information
Processing and Management, 43(4): 1085–102.
Pappa, N., Warwick, C., Terras, M., and Huntington, P.
(2006). The (in)visibility of digital humanities
resources in academic contexts. Paper presented at
Digital Humanities 2006, Paris Sorbonne, 5–9 July
2006.
Rimmer, J., Warwick, C., Blandford, A. and Gow, J.
(2006). User Requirements for Humanities Digital
Libraries. Paper presented at Digital Humanities 2006,
Paris Sorbonne, 5–9 July 2006.
Saunders, R. and Gero, J. S. (2004). Situated design
simulations using curious agents. AIEDAM, 18(2):
153–61.
Stone, S. (1982). Humanities Scholars-Information
needs and uses. Journal of Documentation, 38(4):
292–313.
Talja, S. and Maula, H. (2003). Reasons for the use
and non-use of electronic journals and databases – A
domain analytic study in four scholarly disciplines.
Journal of Documentation, 59(6): 673–91.
Whitmire, E. (2002). Disciplinary differences and under-
graduates’ information- seeking behavior. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 53(8): 631–38.
Warwick, C. (1999a). The lowest canonical denominator:
Electronic literary texts, and their publication, collec-
tion and preservation. In M. Klasson, B. Loughridge
and S. Loof, (eds) New Fields for Research in the 21st
Century, Proceedings of the Anglo Nordic Conference
1999. pp. 133–41.
Warwick, C. (1999b). English Literature, electronic text
and computer analysis: an unlikely combination?
Proceedings of the Association for Computers and the
Humanities- Association for Literary and Linguistic
Computing, Conference, University of Virginia, June
9–13.
Watson-Boone, R. (1994). The information needs and
habits of humanities scholars. Reference Quarterly, 34:
203–16.
Notes
1 http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/
2 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/slais/research/circah/lairah/. All
URLs were last accessed 20 February 2007.
3 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/slais/research/ciber/
4 http://ahds.ac.uk/
5 http://www.humbul.ac.uk/. Humbul and Artifact have
now merged to become Intute Arts and Humanities—
http://www.intute.ac.uk/artsandhumanities/
6 http://www.artifact.ac.uk/
7 The RePAH project (http://repah.dmu.ac.uk/) is
another of the ICT Strategy Projects, which is
examining user requirements for subject portals. They
are using the same three portals, and thus we are
undertaking the log analysis of the data on their behalf.
If You Build It Will They Come? The LAIRAH Study
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 101
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
8 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼hist-4635-1
9 http://www.ota.ox.ac.uk/text 2216
10 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼hist-3441-1
11 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼va-ECKC-1
12 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼va-OEP-1
13 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼hist-4828-1
14 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼va-IWM-1
15 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼lll-2462-1
16 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼arch-335-1
17 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼pa-1018-1
18 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/history/
englishmonasticarchives/
19 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/
20 http://ahds.ac.uk/performingarts/index.htm
21 http://ahds.ac.uk/visualarts/index.htm
22 http://www.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/collection.htm?uri
¼va-LCFCA-1
23 http://www.bl.uk/
24 http://www.nls.uk/
25 http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/
26 http://www.jstor.org/
27 http://www.sosig.ac.uk/. Sosig has now become
Intute Social Sciences—http://www.intute.ac.uk/
socialsciences/
28 http://lion.chadwyck.com/marketing/index.jsp
29 http://www.oxforddnb.com/
30 http://www.lancs.ac.uk/palatine/
31 http://vos.ucsb.edu/
32 http://www.the-orb.net/
33 http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/
34 http://www.oldbaileyonline.org/
35 http://www.bris.ac.uk/parip/introduction.htm
36 http://history.powys.org.uk/history/intro/entry.html
37 http://childes.psy.cmu.edu/
38 http://ahds.ac.uk/history/index.htm
39 http://www.history.ac.uk/
40 http://www.shef.ac.uk/hri/
41 http://www.methodsnetwork.ac.uk/
C. Warwick et al.
102 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
