
1 Introduction
The creation of digital resources is an important
activity in the digital humanities and has produced
a large number of materials currently available
online. These are funded by universities, govern-
ments and philanthropic bodies: the Arts and
Humanities Research Council (AHRC) in the
United Kingdom has funded over 250 digital
humanities projects since 1998. What happens to
these resources once available is poorly understood.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that some resources are
ignored whilst others are frequently used but the
reasons for this are not clear. There have also been
no systematic, evidence-based studies of the use and
non-use of digital humanities resources.
The LAIRAH (Log analysis of Internet
Resources in the Arts and the Humanities) project
(http://www.ucl.ac.uk/slais/LAIRAH) was based at
University College London’s (UCL’s) School of
Library, Archive and Information Studies. The
fifteen-month study, which ran from July 2005 to
September 2006, was funded by the AHRC’s ICT
strategy project scheme to discover what influences
the long-term sustainability and use of digital
resources in the humanities. This article presents
the results of a study of the producers of digital
humanities resources, in particular those that are
particularly well used. Our aim was to discover
whether certain practices in the construction of
digital humanities projects had an effect on its sub-
sequent use.
1.1 Previous work in the area
There are numerous studies about the informa-
tion needs and information-seeking practices of
Correspondence:
Claire Warwick, School of
Library, Archive and
Information Studies,
University College London.
E-mail:
c.warwick@ucl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
383
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn017 Advance Access Published on 12 September 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
humanities scholars (Herman, 2001; Talja and
Maula, 2003; Barrett, 2005; British Academy,
2005). These have added to our understanding of
what kind of resources humanities scholars use,
and those they may like to see in future (Bates,
2002; Palmer and Neumann, 2002; Dalton and
Charnigo, 2004).
Recent studies, including those produced by
other projects that were part of the ICT Strategy
scheme, show that many humanities scholars are
enthusiastic users of digital humanities resources,
although they prefer generic informational
resources (web pages of libraries and archives, or
large online reference collections), to the kind of
digital object which is comparable to a scholarly
book (British Academy, 2005; Brown et al., 2007;
Huxley et al., 2007). They need a wide range of
resources, of both age and type, including printed
materials, manuscripts, personal knowledge collec-
tions and face-to-face information gathering.
They usually reinterpret ideas rather than creating
or discovering new data or facts (Stone, 1982;
Barrett, 2005). Humanities scholars will use technol-
ogies if they fit well with what they do (Bates, 2002),
especially if they save time or effort (Wiberley,
2001). However, they prefer not to have to under-
take any training to enable them to use digital
resources or applications (Brown et al., 2006).
Research has only recently been conducted into
the actual online behaviour of humanities scholars:
by our CIRCAh research group at UCL, of which
LAIRAH formed a part, and by Duff and Cherry at
the University of Toronto (Duff and Cherry, 2004).
(Although Bates’ work on the Getty project pre-
dates web publishing; Bates, 1996.) This research
shows that humanities researchers have sophisti-
cated information skills and mental models of
their physical information environment, although
they find these difficult to apply to the digital
domain (Makri et al., 2007). They are aware of the
affordances and problems of digital resources, being
concerned with accuracy, selection methods, and
ease of use (Warwick et al., 2008a). They require
information about the original item when materials
are digitised (Duff and Cherry, 2000). They expect
high quality content: anything that makes a resource
difficult to understand—a confusing name, a
challenging interface, or data that must be down-
loaded—will deter them from using it (Warwick
et al., 2008a). They may even be affected by emo-
tional responses to the practical environments in
which they use digital or analogue resources
(Rimmer et al., 2008).
Thus it is incumbent on producers of digital
resources not only to understand the working prac-
tices of the scholars for whom they design, but to
produce a resource that is attractive, usable and easy
to understand. However, perhaps surprisingly, there
appears to be no research that assesses how well
digital humanities resources are performing in
these respects. This benchmarking approach, pre-
viously applied to web design (Nielson and Tahir,
2002), new to the study of digital humanities, allows
us to observe the features of successful digital
resources and their effect on usage (e.g. is a link
to documentation available? Do logs indicate that
it is used?). In a previous article, we discussed the
reactions of users when introduced to a sample of
digital humanities resources (Warwick et al., 2008a),
and while we refer briefly to certain findings on the
views of users, this article studies digital resources
from the point of view of their producers. This is
designed to complement our study of users and
enables us to understand the reasons for certain
practices and strategies in resource creation, and
whether they have any impact on use.
2 Methods
A group of twenty-one digital humanities projects
from different subject disciplines were selected for
the study. Although these resources had varying
levels of use, our aim was to select those projects
that were perceived as particularly useful or that we
knew were heavily used. We selected projects to
represent different subject disciplines using a combi-
nation of criteria including log analysis, online ques-
tionnaires and recommendations from Arts and
Humanities Data Service (AHDS) subject centres.
We analysed the server logs of the AHDS and
Humbul portals. Server log analysis can serve as
an important first step towards measuring the use
of electronic resources. This unfiltered data can be
C. Warwick et al.
384 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
used in conjunction with other more qualitative
data, such as interviews with users, in order to
build up a picture of electronic resource usage.
Although deep log analysis has been used extensively
by the CIBER research group at UCL SLAIS, in areas
such as health information and commercial publish-
ing (Huntington et al., 2002; Nicholas et al., 2007),
this technique has not been previously used to assess
use levels of digital resources in the arts and human-
ities. Our use of deep log analysis is discussed in
more detail elsewhere (Warwick et al., 2008b).
However, in essence it involved the analysis of the
search and transaction logs of the two portals web
servers. The records of the IP numbers of machines
accessing these portals enabled us to determine
which resources were being accessed, and patterns
of data concerning frequency of access, nationality
of users, and which parts of the site were accessed.
Questionnaires were also mounted on both the
AHDS and Humbul portals asking respondents as
to which digital resources they found most useful.
The questionnaires were available for four months
and we collected 149 complete responses.
Finally, we selected projects based on expert
recommendations. Although funding for the AHDS
has subsequently been discontinued, at the time of
the study, the AHDS consisted of subject centres in
Archaeology, Visual Arts, Literature, Language and
Linguistics, and Performing Arts. We asked represen-
tatives of each centre as to which resources in their
collections they believed to be most frequently used.
The logs also indicated that a number of digital pro-
jects based at the Humanities Research Institute
(HRI) at Sheffield University were frequently
accessed. We therefore conducted interviews about
the role of the HRI in fostering the creation of digital
humanities resources.
The projects were as follows:
 Old Bailey online1
 Andre Gide Editions project2
 French Stars Project3
 The English Monastic Archives Project4
 The Survey of English Usage5
 The London College of Fashion Archives6
 Excavations at Eynsham Abbey7
 Toronto Dictionary of Old English Corpus
 The Ave Valley Project8
 The Avant Garde Project9
 The DIAMM Project10
 The Channel Tunnel Rail Link Archives
 Designing Shakespeare
 Exeter Cathedral Keystones and Carvings
 The Suffrage Banners Project11
 The Jeremy Bentham Project12
 PARIP13
 The Powys Digital History Project14
 The Celtic Inscribed Stones Project15
 The Imperial War Museum Concise Art
Collection
 GIS of the ancient Parishes of England and
Wales, 1500–1850
We studied any documentation and reports that
could be found on the project’s website, and con-
ducted a series of semi-structured interviews with a
representative of each project, either the principal
investigator (PI) or a research assistant (RA). The
interview guide is available as Appendix 1. However,
we asked about the history of the creation of the
resource, and how it was funded, about the use of
technical standards and any technical support avail-
able. We asked about whether any documentation
had been kept or any user testing carried out. We
asked whether the resource had been as envisaged,
whether any unexpected problems had arisen and
what solutions have been reached. Interviews were
recorded and later transcribed, the text was then
analysed using a grounded theory style approach.
In addition to the themes we had identified in the
interview guide, this approach revealed new areas of
importance, such as researcher training and PI
career progression.
We also carried out workshops with academics
and MA students to determine the reactions of users
to the sample of projects, both used and neglected.
These findings are discussed in detail elsewhere
(Warwick, 2008), but where relevant we refer to
and make comparison with the findings of the
user research in the following discussion.
3 Findings
The interviews suggested a number of factors that
may affect the creation, use and long-term
LAIRAH research in digital humanities projects
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 385
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
sustainability of a digital resource. These include
institutional context, staffing, dissemination, age of
resources, user contact, documentation, access to
documentation, and sustainability issues, which we
discuss in detail subsequently.
3.1 Institutional context
Institutional context had an important impact on
whether or not digital humanities research was to
thrive. Sheffield University in the United Kingdom
is a good example of this. Their HRI is highly valued
by the University and the success of early research
leaders has underlined the prestige of work in digital
humanities, not least because of the availability of
grant funding for humanities research. Where aca-
demics have gained prestige and promotion, other
junior colleagues have been inspired to follow their
example.
However, in another university where a success-
ful digital project was seen as outside the core
research of a rather traditional department, and
the acquisition of grant funding had not been per-
ceived as especially prestigious, no other digital pro-
jects had begun and few colleagues or graduate
students showed interest in the area. We therefore
found a clear correlation between institutional
encouragement of digital humanities research and
the creation and use of digital resources.
Related to these issues of prestige is that of recog-
nition for scholars who engage in digital humanities
research. One PI, a relatively junior scholar, who has
become well known due to her digital humanities
research, also raised these concerns:
This is one of my difficulties because my aca-
demic profile is quite different from my col-
leagues and in fact it actually does map onto a
science model much more. I publish in jour-
nals, I haven’t got a monograph because [. . .]
the minute I start typing it’s out of date and I
go to a lot of conferences
[several intervening paragraphs]
I think I am doing an interesting job and pro-
ductive work but I think we have to rethink
some of those expectations if we want other
people to join us [. . .] Invariably I work with
people who are full professors and men, I am
usually the only woman and the only person
under 50 in the room and that’s a weird thing
for me and I do think that its one of the
reasons I persist but it does put me in a very
difficult position in terms of the responsibility
I am given versus the experience I have and
the, you know academic cloak that I have
because I don’t have the years and years of
scholarship behind me to make the kind of
claims that I am making in some policy level
things and yet on one else is in a position to
make any decisions at all. So I find I alternate
between thinking it’s terribly exciting being at
forefront and being pushed out in front and
thinking wait a minute, can’t I just do a
normal job you know teach and write books
like everybody else? I am part of the new
group of people but I think it’s quite difficult
to advise even PhD students who want to
work in this area that they may not get pro-
moted, they may not get jobs so I think it’s
something that needs to be taken on board.
I don’t know by whom or under what circum-
stances but crediting this work properly is
really important. (P17)
The research culture of particular disciplines
affects the production and use of digital resources.
As the PI makes clear, digital scholarship tends to
assume a more scientific model of scholarly produc-
tion. In Archaeology, this is recognized and
rewarded, and the production of a good digital
resource is regarded as similarly prestigious as
important print publications. Her comments
about advice to PhD students are unfortunately
not unusual. A recent MLA report (MLA, 2007)
has shown a disquieting lack of knowledge amongst
traditional humanities scholars about how digital
scholarship should be valued. However, it is vital
that such issues are addressed, given the importance
of prestige and recognition, within both universities
and subject disciplines, for the acceptance of digital
humanities research.
The advocacy of key individuals who are respected
equally for their scholarship and digital knowledge
may have a galvanizing effect on the production of
digital resources. If such scholars are seen to have
attained recognition and promotion as a result of
their digital research activities, the products of such
C. Warwick et al.
386 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
digital research ought themselves to acquire prestige,
in an analogous fashion to the respect accorded to
books written by distinguished scholars.
3.1.1 Technical support
Most PIs of successful projects were very positive
about the level of support and information provi-
sion received. Most projects were supported by local
IT services or more expert colleagues. But those who
had contact with a centre of digital humanities
excellence, such as the Centre for Computing in
the Humanities, Kings College London or the HRI
at Sheffield were especially well advised. All projects
interviewed had received advice from the AHDS and
some had also been advised by national bodies (such
as HEDS and JISC). However, the lack of the AHDS
suggests that in future there will be an even greater
reliance on local IT services and potentially greater
advantages for those projects fortunate enough to
have access to digital humanities expertise, which
remains relatively rare at least in the United
Kingdom.
Most projects had been carefully planned, and
PIs reported that the finished product turned out
much as expected or better. Nevertheless, most had
encountered unexpected technical difficulties, which
had taken longer than expected to solve. Problems
occasionally occurred during the planning stage if
the PI had insufficient technical knowledge, or
insufficient IT advice had been available, and in a
few cases this meant that the resource could not be
implemented in the form that had originally been
anticipated.
Well originally we did want [the database to
be delivered via the web] but it turned out to
be excessively expensive and actually the pro-
gramming that would have been involved
would have been far too complex for [the
RA] and the data team at the University
wanted to charge about £20,000 or something
so, and there was no money left in the budget
for that and [. . .] we weren’t aware of how big
a job that would be to make it searchable on
the web. (P21)
The more detailed planning that was undertaken,
and the more technically informed the planners,
(whether PI or IT support staff) the less likely it
was that the projects would encounter such prob-
lems. This underlines once again the importance of
sufficient technical support, both at local and
national level.
3.2 Staffing
Recruiting a competent RA for a project is vital and
many PIs interviewed viewed this as key to the suc-
cess of the project. However, finding an RA with
both subject expertise and good knowledge of digital
techniques was described as difficult.
She is a very special breed of person because
she is herself a [subject specified] scholar,
among other things and an IT person and
you know I think that’s where the future
lies. Not to the exclusion of other practi-
tioners doing other things but you know
you need new breed and people like that are
rare. (P22)
Training was therefore indispensable for RAs,
since PIs preferred to employ finding a person
with subject expertise that could be trained in tech-
nical matters than the opposite, as understanding
the subject-specific requirements of a digital project
was considered vital. One PI explained the difficul-
ties that could arise.
I did try having the website designed intern-
ally by our own computer science department
and it was a total disaster. The [features of the
resource] are all circular in shape, when they
had finished processing the images they were
all oval, as if they had been sat on by an ele-
phant and I said ‘‘But the image is oval.’’ And
they said, I quote them exactly ‘‘Oh it won’t
matter people won’t know’’. (P14)
It was also important that the RA should have
good communication skills in order to collaborate
effectively with computer support staff, acting as a
type of translator between the different groups.
[the RA] actually built the database in Access
and she consulted with the IT people at the
university, IT team, and she has also been in
touch with the AHRC data team and so she
[. . .] comes out with all these specialists about
LAIRAH research in digital humanities projects
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 387
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
how to go about it but she actually learnt to
use Access from scratch and build it all herself
and so she has kind of been responsible for the
technological side. (P21)
Despite the need for most RAs to learn new
(usually technical) skills, both PIs and RAs thought
the training available unsatisfactory. Many had been
left with no option but to train themselves in the
relevant technical skills—a time-consuming process.
There was no provision within the grant [. . .]
to provide me with any more advanced train-
ing to do what I should be doing.
I had had database training but not at that
sort of level [. . .] I have people come to me
and it’s like well you know they won’t pay for
us to learn how to do this because we ought to
know how to do it. [. . .] I have done a MSc in
Computing and Archaeology [. . .] I can pro-
gram [. . .] but I have never done any
Windows programming before, [. . .] so I
was having to teach myself the Windows
system on a live dataset, [. . .] that people
were trying to use and that did sort of create
problems. (P19, RA interviewee)
The absence of technical knowledge on the part
of some PIs therefore meant that RAs might be
expected to undertake tasks for which they had
insufficient knowledge, or were not given enough
time to train themselves in new techniques or to
keep up with technical developments.
It also proved difficult to continue to employ
RAs once individual projects had finished. Many
PIs expressed frustration at training an RA to the
desired level and then being unable to retain them
for future projects.
[It is] very hard to find good assistants.
I mean one of the bottlenecks in this kind of
work is that it takes a certain odd combina-
tion of skills in order to be able to do it well,
so you need to be very detail oriented, you
need to know [the subject] and have a anal-
ytical certain mind and you have to be com-
putationally literate. [. . .] I mean we have
tried to get other people to do this kind of
work [but] it’s difficult to find people with
the right combination of skills and get the
money to pay them [. . .] because the money
comes and goes. I have been lucky because I
have been doing this for a long time so I have
developed all the appropriate skills [but]
I am dependant on funding and funding or
I have to go and do something else. [. . .] what
you really need is a secure funding scheme so
people can actually develop these kind of
skills. But you can’t just like take them off
the street. (P1, RA interviewee)
In future, such problems might be addressed by
providing more training in digital humanities tech-
niques as options for students undertaking graduate
courses in humanities subjects. For those who did
not progress to work in academia, this would also
provide important transferable skills for students in
the employment market.
The unpredictable nature of arts and humanities
funding usually means that experienced researchers
cannot be retained and it is necessary to train new,
inexperienced staff if the project is granted further
funding. This means precious time is lost on new
grants, and hard-won expertise is lost. This prob-
lem, however, was lessened for some PIs who
worked at departments, or digital humanities cen-
tres where a critical mass of digital humanities pro-
jects were developed, allowing RAs to move from
one project to another. Here a member of the
Sheffield University French Department describes a
rare example of career progression, where an RA has
progressed from being a post-doctoral researcher, to
faculty membership:
It’s a whole new career structure that doesn’t
really exist in the humanities. How do research
associates build on what they have done to a
proper career? And recently [the RA] has had
her post confirmed so she really is a fully
fledged lecturer. So that’s a happy ending and
a sort of collaboration really of the potential for
developing a whole set of innovative research
schemes in a non-conventional career path
which leads it into a conventional one: because
you couldn’t of course bring someone in with
expertise which is just, well like gold dust
really, very rare. (P22)
C. Warwick et al.
388 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
This kind of recognition of the work done by
digital humanities scholars is still rare in the
United Kingdom, but it is vital for their career
development. It is also significant that this has hap-
pened in the context of a university where digital
humanities research is highly valued. Thus, the
issues of prestige, promotion and the recognition
of digital humanities scholarship are evidently
linked.
3.3 Dissemination
The strongest correlation that we found between a
single activity and resources that were well used was
in the area of dissemination of results. All the pro-
jects that were interviewed spent considerable effort
in disseminating information. For the majority of
academics, this was a completely new area, as
most of them were used to writing books or other
textual materials that would then be marketed by
publishers. However, it was not surprising that
some of the best known projects had the most
varied and determined dissemination strategy.
Dissemination activities were varied and
included sending out flyers to departments, libraries
and archives and using email lists and the web. Most
PIs gave papers at workshops, conference and semi-
nars; in subject-specific and digital humanities
domains, this was deigned to disseminate informa-
tion to as broad a community as possible. The most
unusual form of dissemination was reported as
follows:
[. . .] one of the women from [the] village
phoned me up a few months back and said,
we want to make a tea-towel out of one of the
pages of your book about the [archaeological
site], do we have your permission? I said yes,
if you give me a tea-towel, so it is still gener-
ating a product itself. Yeah, not many of our
projects end up as a tea-towel. (P13)
Interviewees stressed that both producers of digi-
tal resources and funding agencies must realize the
key role of dissemination for a project’s success.
When planning new projects, successful producers
planned to allow time and money to make it possi-
ble for PIs to make presentations at conferences and
workshops, and for RAs to publicize the resource on
appropriate email lists or by other more traditional
means. Enthusiastic promotion of a resource was a
new but vital role that the producer must undertake
on to ensure its continuing use.
3.3.1 Age of resources
Many of the well-used projects also tended to be
relatively long-lived. It may be that early adopters
have remained loyal to resources which they first
used when little else was available It may also be
that when little else was available, it was easier for
producers to disseminate information about their
resource, and thus it became well known. Early
adopters and promoters of resources also tended
to become experts to which people turned to for
recommendations on digital resources.
[. . .] increasingly what people want is gui-
dance through the huge number, [of digital
resources] people are just bewildered by the
amount of information that’s out there and
what to do with it. So I find that people
have gone from just sort of saying, ‘‘Wow
that’s great that you have done this’’ to,
‘‘Yes that’s great that you have done this but
how does that work with the X collection or
how do I incorporate that with these other
things that are going on?’’ Basically give me
a list of [. . .] your top ten. (P17)
The persistent use of older digital resources, even
when newer, perhaps better ones become available
may be explained by a commercial phenomenon
known as ‘switching costs’. This suggests that even
when a better product is available, users will remain
loyal to products or services that they know because
the cost of switching to a new product is too great,
either monetarily or in terms of effort
(Yanamandram and White, 2006). In the case of
digital resources, users may be unwilling to spend
the time or the effort to learn how to use a new
resource if the older resource continues to fulfil
their needs adequately.
3.4 User contact
Very few projects had undertaken any type of user
testing or had kept in contact with their users. Most
projects were unaware of the amount and type of
LAIRAH research in digital humanities projects
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 389
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
use that their resources were experiencing. This is
important, since our research with users showed
that they had numerous concerns about the content,
presentation and usability of digital resources, many
of which might have been relatively easily remedied,
had producers been aware of them. For example,
they often failed to find even simple information
about the purpose of the resource, and its intended
use. This kind of requirement would have emerged
through user testing, and such information would
be easy to provide, and would significantly add to
the user experience (Warwick et al., 2008a).
Yet, all projects were interested in finding out
more about how their resource was being used
and by whom, and in receiving user feedback and
had made some efforts to consider their users. We
discuss these subsequently.
3.4.1 Designer as user
This was the most common method used. PIs
believed that because of their subject expertise
they understood the needs of users and could infer
user requirements from their own behaviour.
Although this method may uncover some user
needs, it is not advisable. Since it is only possible
to truly to know what users may need by asking
them (Schneiderman and Plaisant, 2005) some pro-
jects also discovered that their audience consisted of
a much more diverse group of users than the aca-
demic subject experts they had expected.
Its impact is not what I expected. I remember
for NOF we had to do a projection of visitor
numbers and we kind of we just pulled them
out, we had absolutely no idea and of course
they were just tiny in comparison to what’s
actually happened and it has really taken off.
You know I mean this is obviously just to
learn how effective the internet is at spreading
information but it just turns up in all the most
unlikely places like you know the last week
came an email saying ‘‘Did you know that
your websites been cited in arguments before
the United States Supreme Court’’. (P6)
A complex user population, including non-
expert users, imposes new requirements of produ-
cers. Users at both of our workshops found that
guidance for non-expert users was lacking in most
projects, and would have welcomed more informa-
tion about how to use resources. This does not
mean dumbing down a resource, since, as this quo-
tation shows, a non-expert in digital resource use
may be highly expert in their subject area, but
require some introduction to the use of a new digi-
tal resource.
A more formal user survey can also help to avoid
making resources more complex than necessary.
Looking back at it we should have really done
a proper user needs sort of survey thing before
hand rather than just launch into this thing.
[. . .] a lot of it was complicated luxury that
you didn’t really need and so I think we could
have saved ourselves a lot of work by going to
the users to start with and saying you know
‘‘What is it you would really like out of this?’’
(P19)
This was confirmed by our workshop users who
preferred a simple, uncomplicated interface to
resources that required significant effort to learn
how to use. This kind of design is therefore not
advisable since it is difficult to design a resource
based on the producer’s own patterns of use, as this
can lead to unexpected difficulties for potential users
and ultimately lead to its neglect (HEFCE, 1999).
3.4.2 Informal user feedback
Some projects collected information from users
from the comments and questions when presenting
conference papers or at workshops. This method
was especially common in projects concerning his-
tory. However, for this to be effective, the project
must be at least partially developed and it can be
difficult to make significant changes at this stage. It
can also be difficult to derive any concrete design
requirements from such informal feedback, where
there is little active interaction between users and
producers.
3.4.3 ‘Contact us’
Several projects made it possible for users to make
comments, give feedback or to ask questions by
e-mail feedback from the project website. The use
made of this information varied. Four projects
C. Warwick et al.
390 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
used e-mail lists to communicate with their users.
One project also used user comments to inform
yearly updating of the resource. Another maintained
a bibliography of publications written after use of
their resource. As a result, they had an unusually
clear idea of how their resource was used.
This kind of feedback tended to be used by well-
established projects, as a way of keeping the
resources updated and staying in contact with the
user community.
3.4.4 Direct user feedback gathering
Only two projects carried out organized user testing
in the initial phases of project design. PARIP had
carried out a user needs survey, and the Channel
Tunnel project conducted focus groups. Three pro-
jects also took an informed decision not to carry out
user testing. They adapted interfaces and systems
that had worked well on similar projects or they
were associated with a large digital humanities
research centre and based their work on previous
experiences.
Six other projects collected user feedback by test-
ing a pilot version or a new software version release
at workshops or by sending out e-mails to a known
group of users for beta-testing. One PI commented
that as a result of the funding body’s insistence on
user testing they had carried out more rigorous tests
than they had planned to do.
Testing early releases of software or pilot projects
on users is to be welcomed as later versions can be
adapted in response to feedback. The disadvantage
of not including users from the initial design phase,
however, is that if significant changes are required
to design or functionality at a relatively advanced
stage of development, it may prove too expensive or
time-consuming to make them. These types of tests
usually concentrate on more technical aspects,
whereas humanities users are also concerned with
the provenance and the selection of the contents, as
we found at our user workshops (Warwick et al.,
2008a).
3.5 Documentation
Documentation was available for all but one
resource. However, the degree of sophistication of
this documentation varied considerably between
projects (Warwick et al., forthcoming). The best
documented resources tended to be older ones
where the documentation was a vital part of the
project’s collective memory. Documentation prac-
tice also varied by subject. For example, archaeolo-
gists expect a resource to be documented, whether it
is produced in physical or digital format.
Yes well that’s the sort of scientific paradigm,
in a sense that if you are given a pile of Roman
pottery then saying what you are doing while
you are doing with it and documenting it is
seen as part of the, you know, the rigour of the
study. (P20)
This also applied to projects produced by archi-
vists and linguists where documenting decisions is
an expected part of the research process.
In many cases, however, documentation was
fragmented and partial, consisting of e-mails, min-
utes of meetings, planning documents, and progress
log books, most of which would only be meaningful
to internal project staff. In some cases, original plans
and documents had been lost. The resulting docu-
mentation therefore would generally be very diffi-
cult for someone not directly involved in the project
to understand and would usually only cover certain
aspects.
Although most projects were aware of the impor-
tance of documentation, they blamed time con-
straints for lack of better documentation. Since it
was not a project deliverable or submitted for peer
review, it tended to be neglected.
I do remember it was quite fraught latterly
because there were [. . .] the publisher’s dead-
lines to meet and so on and ironing out the
bugs. It was very much a seat of the pants
business really. So it was very much opera-
tional really rather than, we didn’t have the
time [. . .] we were in new territory for us we
were so anxious to get the thing done that we
didn’t really have the leisure or indeed the
foresight to plot what we were doing. (P22)
3.5.1 Access to documentation
Documentation was usually difficult to access, espe-
cially when decisions were recorded in an informal
way. Most documentation was kept by the PI or the
LAIRAH research in digital humanities projects
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 391
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
institution, and whether in paper or electronic
format, its availability was generally not advertised.
At one university, documentation was deposited
with the library, but would still have been relatively
difficult for an external researcher to access, first
requiring him/her to know that such a despot had
been made, and second requiring a visit to the
library and permission to use the material.
In some cases (notably in Archaeology, linguis-
tics, and archive studies), projects made documen-
tation available either through the AHDS
Archaeology website or from the project website
itself. This represented especially good practice, as
it was easy for users to find and access it. This is
important, since users at our workshops repeatedly
requested easy access to information about the con-
tent and provenance of a resource typically provided
by just such documentation.
3.6 Sustainability
Maintenance and long-term sustainability was
another area of concern. At the end of development,
resources were either archived with the AHDS or
backed up on the university server, yet few were
actively updated. Most PIs seemed unaware that
updating is vital in order for a resource to remain
functional despite possible changes in software sys-
tems and delivery interfaces. A stark demonstration
of the potential problems caused by this was pro-
vided by one former RA.
Male Speaker: I was very concerned right
from the very beginning ten years ago about
who was going to maintain this and how it
was going to stay available and how it was
going to be updated that never really got
resolved and as a result we are in this very
unfortunate situation where the AHRC spent
£200,000 whatever it was employing two of us
for three years and within ten years of the start
of the project half of it doesn’t work anymore.
Interviewer: Did you talk with anyone about
trying to maintain it further?
Male Speaker: Well I talked to my bosses about
it yes and they worried about it a bit but in the
end they just decided that the easiest way of
doing that was to give it to these people in
Glasgow but I have no idea whether it’s just
sitting on a hard disc in Glasgow and nobody
has touched it or whether there is actually any-
body working on it.
They weren’t helped by the fact that the man
[. . .] who did the web design for us then took
early retirement. [. . .]
Every so often I have guilty pangs in the back
of my brain that I really ought to try and find
out why the web interface has stopped work-
ing and whether we can actually get it up and
running again but I am so involved in my own
projects and this wasn’t my project and it
doesn’t contribute to anything that counts to
anything as far as I am concerned. It’s not
going to add to my RAE rating, it’s not
going to give me any value points in the [aca-
demic organisation] but I come out in a cold
sweat every time I think about it and even the
webpage of the site hasn’t changed in six
years. (P19)
Lack of funding to update the resource has, in
this case, resulted in a digital resource that is almost
unusable, despite the large investment made in its
creation.
A few interviewees, however, did recognize the
importance of updating and maintaining the web-
site. Because a website that is not updated may indi-
cate a resource that is no longer fully functional, as
in the example above, users have rightly become
wary of interfaces that appear dated, and use this
criterion as a way of assessing the relevance and
trustworthiness of a site. One of the few PIs to rea-
lize this observed that:
I think it is important that you [update] partly
because when you look at a website and it says
last updated more than 12 months ago you
just immediately think this is being allowed
to wither on the vine and you don’t trust it.
So I want to be able to if nothing else to say on
our homepage, last updated or we have the
version number 4.2 you know date July 2006
is a way of assuring the users that we are still
paying attention. (P6)
Another important issue is related to the life
cycle of a digital resource. When the AHDS deposit
C. Warwick et al.
392 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
system was created in the mid-1990s it was mod-
elled on a digital production system where social
scientific data sets were deposited with a data
archive once research was completed. Static data
sets could be downloaded and used again by other
researchers. Early digital humanities resources were
also designed for CD, which is also a static medium.
Now, however, most digital resources are delivered
over the web and this old model of deposit seems to
be no longer sufficient. In the case of most large
digital resources, the data is no longer independent
of the software or the interface that delivers it, and
the changeable nature of web delivery means that a
static resource produced at the end of a research
project will become outdated relatively quickly and
may become unusable, although project creators
appear not to realize this. The same problem applies
to archiving resources in digital repositories, since
although the data may be deposited, most institu-
tions do not have the resources to update interfaces
to that data.
4 Discussion
We have shown that well-used digital resource pro-
jects in the humanities share a number of common
features. They rely upon good technical support,
researchers that combine expertise in technical mat-
ters and humanities disciplines, and a supportive
institutional environment that fosters digital huma-
nities research and promotes scholars who engage in
it. Not surprisingly, many successful projects were,
as a result, associated with digital humanities res-
earch centres. Remaining problems include the
intractable difficulties of adequate recognition for
the digital humanities model of team-based scholar-
ship This includes both the problem of rewarding
scholars who do not conform to the monograph
producing single scholar research norm, and that
of how to retain skilled researchers and ensure
that their careers progress. We found notable suc-
cess in these areas at the University of Sheffield, but
this remains an isolated example in the United
Kingdom.
However, the single most common uniting fea-
ture of well-used projects was their enthusiastic
dissemination of information about themselves.
This is a new demand on humanities scholars, but
our study suggests that it is vital that projects pro-
mote themselves in as many ways, and at as many
different fora as possible.
Our study also suggested that even in the case of
well-used resources, some areas of practice could be
improved, including organized user testing, the pro-
vision of and access to documentation and more
effective methods for updating and maintaining
resources.
User consultation was relatively rarely under-
taken, despite the fact that it helps projects to
design effective resources, and to avoid developing
in ways that users may find over complicated or
confusing. However, user testing, like disseminating
information, is a skill that most humanities scholars
have not acquired. It is therefore important that
digital projects should be willing to work with
those who already have expertise in this area, for
example, researchers from Human Computer
Interaction, Library and Information Studies, or
practitioner librarians.
Funding agencies can have a vital role in this area
by encouraging or even requiring digital humanities
projects to include user testing within their plan-
ning, including allocating the time and funding
required. One very positive result of the LAIRAH
projects is that the UK JISC funding agency now
requires a much greater component of user consul-
tation in proposals to create or digitize resources.
Documentation was another relatively neglected
area. Most projects understood its importance, but
assigned it a low priority because it was not a deli-
verable. Only in disciplines where documentation
was usual in general scholarship, such as
Archaeology and Linguistics, was it routinely kept.
Yet, documentation is vital, to maintain the institu-
tional memory of a project and preserve the ratio-
nale of the design process. If scholars planning new
digital resources can understand the decision taken
by successful projects, they can avoid the repeated
solving of the same problems, thereby saving time
and money. Users also need to find the information
that documentation contains about provenance and
the selection of source material, yet it was often
difficult to locate. If more projects adopted the
LAIRAH research in digital humanities projects
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 393
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
excellent practice of providing top-level links form
their website to documentation, then users would be
greatly reassured about the quality of resources with
which they are unfamiliar.
Funding councils might also play an important
role in this area, and might consider requiring at
least a minimum level of documentation to be a
deliverable of all funded projects. An agreed tem-
plate would be helpful to producers from subjects
not accustomed to keeping documentation and
would provide intelligible information in a standard
format for users.
Sustainability remains an intractable problem
given the current models of funding and archiving
digital resources. Yet, we have seen that money
spent developing resources is wasted if they are
allowed to deteriorate, because of a lack of funding
to update and maintain them. The de facto solution
is that individual institutions have become respon-
sible for the electronic resources produced by their
staff. However, although they may be willing to
archive a static version of a resource in a repository
and provide web server space, it is far more difficult
for them to provide resources for active updating,
since few institutional repositories have the exper-
tise or personnel to ensure that the functionality of
the resource is maintained. As a result, it seems
likely that the slow decay of once functional digital
resources will become more rather than less preva-
lent in future, at least in the case of the UK-based
digital resources.
Some funding bodies, for example the Getty
foundation, have begun to require electronic
resource producers to find a commercially viable
option for their project’s sustainability once the
initial funding has been used, by charging for all
or part of their use. However, while this may work
in the case of popular resources with a large user
base, projects that are of interest to a smaller, more
specialized user community are likely to find this
model challenging. This model also seems likely
only to work where resources are uniquely valuable,
since attempts to make money out of web resources
that are initially free, such as online newspapers,
suggests that users will pay for digital content only
if it is vital and cannot be found elsewhere for free
(McCarthy, 2003).
The ideal solution is that funding bodies should
make available small sums for continued updating.
Although this is likely to prove unpopular, the alter-
native is that digital resources will slowly decay and
become unusable for want of funds to update them.
This would be a waste of the initial funding which is
usually much larger than the cost of timely updat-
ing. Yet, the decision taken by the AHRC has forced
institutions in the United Kingdom to take sole
responsibility for sustainability of digital resources.
The consequences of this may not be apparent for
some years, but it is to be hoped that other national
bodies may make more enlightened decisions.
5 Recommendations
We have developed a series of recommendations
whose aim is to highlight the areas where digital
resource projects have proved successful and those
where changes could greatly aid their success. These
have already been used to evaluate, and aid in
updating one digital humanities project (Warwick
et al., 2007), and we hope that they will be of use to
projects and funding agencies alike.
(1) Documentation: Projects should keep docu-
mentation and make it available from the project
website, making clear the extent, provenance, and
selection methods of materials for the resource.
Funding bodies might consider making documenta-
tion a compulsory deliverable of a funded project.
Discussions could be held between relevant stake-
holders and the funding bodies, with the aim of
producing an agreed documentation template.
This should specify what should be documented
and the level of detail.
(2) Users: Projects should have a clear idea of
whom the expected users might be; consult them
as soon as possible and maintain contact through
the project via a dedicated e-mail list, website feed-
back or other appropriate method. They should
carry out formal user surveys, software and interface
tests and integrate the results into project design.
Applicants for funding should show that they have
consulted documentation of other relevant projects
and discuss what they have learnt from it in their
case for support. The results of such contact could
C. Warwick et al.
394 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
then be included in the final report as a condition of
satisfactory progress.
(3) Management: Projects should have access to
good technical support, ideally from a centre of
excellence in digital humanities. Projects should
recruit staff who have both subject expertise and
knowledge of digital humanities techniques, then
train them in other specialist techniques as neces-
sary. Funding bodies might consider requiring uni-
versities to offer more training to graduate students
and RAs in digital humanities techniques.
(4) Sustainability: Ideally projects should main-
tain and actively update their interface, content and
functionality of the resource, and not simply archive
it with a data archive such as the AHDS. However,
this is dependent on a funding model which makes
this possible.
(6) Dissemination: Disseminate information
about itself widely, both within its own subject
domain and in digital humanities. Information
should be disseminated widely about the reasons
for user testing and its benefits, for example, via
AHRC/AHDS workshops. Project should be
encouraged to collaborate with experts on user
behaviour.
6 Conclusion
By identifying successful and well-used digital
humanities resources, and ascertaining the
common approaches and problems faced by the
producers of these resources, the LAIRAH project
has highlighted possible areas that may predeter-
mine whether a digital humanities resource will be
well used by its constituent community (and
beyond). By adopting the recommendations pre-
sented here, both funders and creators of digital
humanities resources should have a greater chance
of seeing the resource become usable, used, and
known within the academic community.
References
Bates, M. J. (2002). The cascade of interactions in the
digital library interface. Information Processing &
Management, 38(3): 381–400.
Bates, M. J. (1996). The Getty end-user online
searching project in the humanities: report No. 6:
overview and conclusions. College & Research
Libraries, 57: 514–23.
British Academy (2005). E-resources for Research in
the Humanities and Social Sciences. http://www.britac.
ac.uk/reports/eresources/report/ (accessed 29 May
2008).
Brown, S., Ross, R., Gerrard, D., Greengrass, M., and
Bryson, J. (2007). RePAH A User Requirements Analysis
for Portals in the Arts and Humanities. Arts and
Humanities Research Council. http://repah.dmu.
ac.uk/report/pdfs/RePAHReport-Complete.pdf
(accessed 29 May 2008).
Barrett, A. (2005). The information seeking habits of
graduate student researchers in the humanities. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(4): 324–31.
Dalton, M. S. and Charnigo, L. (2004). Historians and
their information sources. College & Research Libraries,
65(5): 400–25.
Duff, W. M. and Cherry, J. M. (2000). Use of historical
documents in a digital world: comparisons with
original materials and microfiche. Information
Research, 6(1) http://InformationR.net/ir/6-1/paper86.
html (accessed 29 May 2008).
Duff, W., Craig, B., and Cherry, J. (2004). Historians’ use
of archival sources: promises and pitfalls of the digital
age. Public Historian, 26(2): 7–22.
HEFCE (1999). Use of TLTP Materials in UK Higher
Education Report 99/39. http://www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/
hefce/1999/99_39.htm (accessed 29 May 2008).
Herman, E. (2001). End-users in academia: meeting the
information needs of university researchers in an elec-
tronic age. Part 2. Innovative information-accessing
opportunities and the researcher: user acceptance of
IT-based information resources in academia. ASLIB
Proceedings, 53(10): 431–457.
Huntington, P., Nicholas, D., Williams, P., and
Gunter, B. (2002). Characterising the health
information consumer: an examination of the health
information sources used by digital television users.
Libri, 52(1): 16–27.
Huxley, L., Mullings, C., Hodos, T., and Jones, D.
(2007). Gathering Evidence: Current ICT Use and
Future Needs for Arts and Humanities Researchers.
Arts and Humanities Research Council.
Makri, S., Blandford, A., Buchanan, G., Gow, J.,
Rimmer, J., and Warwick, C. (2007). A library or
just another information resource? A case study of
LAIRAH research in digital humanities projects
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 395
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
users’ mental models of traditional and digital
libraries. Journal of the American Society of
Information Science and Technology, 58(3): 433–45.
McCarthy, K. (2003). This is the future of online news-
papers, The Register. 9 July 2003. http://www.theregister.
co.uk/2003/07/09/this_is_the_future/ (accessed 29 May
2008).
MLA (2007). MLA Task Force on Evaluating Scholarship
for Tenure and Promotion. http://www.mla.org/tenure_
promotion (accessed 29 May 2008).
Nicholas, D., Huntington, P., Jamali, H., and
Dobrowolski, T. (2007). Characterising and
evaluating information seeking behaviour in a
digital (consumer) environment: spotlight on the
‘‘bouncer’’. Information Processing and Management,
43(4): 1085–102.
Nielsen, J. and Tahir, M. (2002). Homepage Usability: 50
Websites Deconstructed. Indianapolis: New Riders
Publishing.
Palmer, C. L. and Neumann, L. (2002). The Information
work of interdisciplinary humanities scholars:
exploration and translation. Library Quarterly, 72:
85–117.
Rimmer, J., Warwick, C., Blandford, A., Gow, J., and
Buchanan, G. (2008). An examination of the physical
and digital qualities of humanities research. Information
Processing & Management, 44(3): 1374–92.
Schneiderman, B. and Plaisant, C. (2005). Designing the
User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human Computer
Interaction. 4th Edn. Reading, MA/Harlow: Pearson-
Addison Wesley.
Stone, S. (1982). Humanities scholars — Information
needs and uses. Journal of Documentation, 38(4):
292–313.
Talja, S. and Maula, H. (2003). Reasons for the use and
non-use of electronic journals and databases- a domain
analytic study in four scholarly disciplines. Journal of
Documentation, 59(6): 673–691.
Warwick, C., Terras, M., Galina, I., Huntington, P., and
Pappa, N. (2007). Evaluating digital humanities
resources: The LAIRAH Project Checklist and the
Internet Shakespeare Editions Project. ELPUB2007.
Openness in Digital Publishing: Awareness, Discovery
and Access – Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Electronic Publishing held in Vienna,
Austria, 13–15 June 2007, Vienna: OEKK-Editions,
pp. 297–306.
Warwick, C., Terras, M., Huntington, P., and Pappa, N.
(2008a). If you build it will they come? The LAIRAH
study Quantifying the Use of Online Resources in the
Arts and Humanities through Statistical Analysis of
User Log Data. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
23(1): 85–102.
Warwick, C., Terras, M., Galina, I., Huntington, P., and
Pappa, N. (2008b). Library and information resources,
and users of digital resources in the humanities.
Program, 41(2): 5–27.
Warwick, C., Galina, I., Rimmer, J., Terras, M.,
Blandford, A., Gow, J., and Buchanan,G.
(Forthcoming). Documenting digital resources in the
humanities: the importance of technical and procedural
documentation, Journal of Documentation.
Wiberley, S. E. (2001). Time and technology. College and
Research Libraries, 61(5): 421–31.
Yanamandram, V. and White, L. (2006). Switching bar-
riers in business-to-business services: a qualitative
study. International Journal of Industry Management,
17(2): 158.
Notes
1 http://www.oldbaileyonline.org/ (accessed 29 May
2008).
2 http://www.shef.ac.uk/hri/projects/projectpages/gide.
html (accessed 29 May 2008).
3 http://www.shef.ac.uk/hri/projects/projectpages/
frenchstars.html (accessed 29 May 2008).
4 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/history/englishmonasticarchives/
(accessed 29 May 2008).
5 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/english-usage/ (accessed 29 May
2008).
6 http://vads.ahds.ac.uk/collections/LCFCA.html
(accessed 29 May 2008).
7 http://ads.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/projArch/
eynsham_OAU/index.cfm?CFID¼370757&C
FTOKEN¼ 91009870 (accessed 29 May 2008).
8 http://ads.ahds.ac.uk/catalogue/search/fr.cfm?rcn ¼
AVE_MILLET_BA-1 (accessed 29 May 2008).
9 http://www.arts.ed.ac.uk/europgstudies/rprojects/
avant-garde/index.html (accessed 29 May 2008).
10 http://www.diamm.ac.uk/ (accessed 29 May 2008).
11 http://vads.ahds.ac.uk//collections/FSB.html (accessed
29 May 2008).
12 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/ (accessed 29
May 2008).
13 http://www.bris.ac.uk/parip/ (accessed 29 May 2008).
14 http://history.powys.org.uk/ (accessed 29 May 2008).
15 http://www.ucl.ac.uk/archaeology/cisp/ (accessed 29
May 2008).
C. Warwick et al.
396 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
