
1 Background
1.1 Text encoding
Text encoding has been an integrated part of the
work of many scholars for a number of years.
Encoded texts, especially texts coded on the basis of
the TEI guidelines (TEI, 2002), are being created
and used in a number of ways. Web presentations
and printed editions are common ways of using the
products of text encoding.
Work related to the understanding of encoding
as such has followed text encoding for a long time.
An example of this is the discussion concerning
overlapping hierarchies in texts (e.g. Renear et al.,
1996), which is a discussion that to a great extent
emerged as a result of text encoding. More recently,
the meaning of markup itself is a topic for dis-
cussions, as seen in e.g. Sperberg-McQueen et al.
(2002). One of the reasons why these discussions are
important is that they will influence the methods
used for building databases based on facts found in
XML texts. These facts can be expressed in the text
as such, in the XML tags or through various
combinations of the two.
Databases based on facts expressed in XML
documents differ from databases built in order
to represent the text as such. An example of the
latter is the letters published by the Documentation
Project in Norway (Eide, 2003). The text of each
letter is stored in a database, but the database
is merely used as a tool to organize the blocks of
SGML fragments as well as the meta-data connected
to them.
1.2 Modelling
Databases based on facts expressed in XML docu-
ments are built in order to reflect not only a text as
such, but also the state of the world as it is described
in the text, or, more specifically, the subset of such a
Correspondence:
Øyvind Eide,
Unit for Digital
Documentation at
the Faulty of Arts,
University of Oslo,
P.O. Box 1123 – Blindern,
N-0317 Oslo,
Norway.
E-mail:
oyvind.eide@edd.uio.no
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008.  The Author 2007. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
doi:10.1093/llc/fqm040 Advance Access Published on 24 November 2007
27
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
state revealed by a specific reading. A modelling of
readings of texts of this kind is described by Willard
McCarty as one of the important parts of human-
ities computing (McCarty, 2005).
A short example sentence will illustrate this
point:
[1] ‘A man of old age spoke.’
We may consider a document containing only
sentence [1] above. Based on the text string in [1],
such a database will not only store the string in
connection with other strings in the text, with
reference to the printed source, etc. It will also store
facts found through reading and understanding the
string, such as:
 There exists a person x.
 x is old.
 x is a male.
 x spoke at time t.
 t < present.
The actual facts stored in the database will vary
with the model used. But they will usually, if not
always, take the extension of expressions in the texts
into consideration. Consequently, not only a name
such as ‘Herman Melville’, but also aspects of the
person or persons referred to by the name, as well
as that particular person’s relationships to other
entities around him, are included in this kind of
model.
2 The Exhibition Problem
In a paper presented at ACH/ALLC 2005, Allen H.
Renear et al. describe a problem of potentially great
significance for the modelling of readings of texts
(Renear et al., 2005). They argue that:
In ordinary linguistic communication we
often use a name to refer to something in
order to then go on to attribute some property
to that thing. However when we do this we do
not naturally construe our linguistic behavior
as being at the same time an assertion that the
thing in question has that name. (Renear et al.,
2005, p. 176)
Further, they claim that this distinction is over-
looked when conceptual models based on encoded
texts are developed. This observation gave rise to
some consideration of our own methods at the Unit
for Digital Documentation at the University of Oslo,
resulting in this article.
We have been using SGML- and XML-encoded
material as sources for several of our databases
(Holmen and Uleberg, 1996, Holmen et al., 2007).
The way this is done is by marking up texts both
descriptively and interpretatively, followed by the
use of software to extract information which is
included in the databases. When we build up a data-
base based on information found in written material,
it is important to document in the database as to
who is responsible for the facts in the database.
Which facts are asserted by the text, and which are
exhibited in or presupposed by the text? If Renear’s
argument is correct, we may infer that the databases
include assertions that are based on information
in the source texts that is, strictly speaking, not
grounded in these texts. For example, we could be
using a text as the source of a naming in the database
whereas the naming is merely exhibited, and not
asserted, in the text. When modelling the reading
of texts, we have to take this problem into
consideration.
But why is it actually a problem? An example of
the problem can be found in the difference between
sentences [4] and [5] below:
[4] «Moby Dick was written by Herman
Melville.»
[5] «The name of the author of Moby Dick is
Herman Melville.»
The important fact is that sentence [5] asserts a
different state of affairs compared to the one
asserted by sentence [4]. According to Renear:
We refer to this relationship as exhibition.
We say that the brief document/utterance
‘‘Moby Dick was written by Herman Melville’’
exhibits the state of affairs that ‘‘the name
of the author of Moby Dick is ‘Herman
Melville’ ’’, but it does not assert that state of
affairs. What it does assert is that Melville is
the author of Moby Dick. Although naming
is our prototypical example of exhibition
Ø. Eide
28 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
in this paper, we believe that exhibition is
a widespread and diverse phenomenon.
(Renear et al., 2005, p. 176)
The CIDOC-CRM is an ontology made in the
museum community in order to model cultural
heritage information. The ontology will be described
further below. In this article, the following thesis will
be discussed: the use of CIDOC-CRM as a modelling
tool can assist us in solving the problem of modelling
the difference between what is asserted and what is
exhibited in utterances such as [4] and [5] above. To
look into this, let us first consider an example text
for which I claim to be able to solve the problem
by using CIDOC-CRM. Next, I will return to
the Herman Melville problem. I will try the same
method to sentence [4] above and explore whether
that problem is also solvable. But before we enter
into the modelling, I will briefly discuss three resolu-
tions to the exhibition problem described by Renear.
2.1 Renear’s three false resolutions
Renear proposes three possible resolutions to the
problem, but also states that all of them are false.
These resolutions are the following:
(1) TEI encoding represents features of the text
only.
(2) The use of two arcs, i.e. ‘The Semantic Web
community solution’, which will be discussed
subsequently.
(3) Exhibition is a special case of presupposition.
Based on the description of our work above, it
should be obvious that resolution no. (1) is not an
alternative for us. Semantic modelling of the real
world on the basis of descriptions in texts is part
of our work. The relationships between textual
descriptions and features outside of the text have to
be examined.
I find it difficult to understand how resolution
no. (3) may represent a possible solution. Whether
exhibition is a type of presupposition or not does
not change the basic problem, i.e. in our case, the
use of a text as the source of a naming which is
merely exhibited in the text. The problem remains
the same if the naming is also presupposed in the
text, as long as it is not asserted. Although this is an
interesting question, it will not in itself solve the
problem. To quote Renear:
Currently we are undecided on this issue but
we note that even if exhibition does turn out
to be a form of presupposition that would
remove neither the difficulty exhibition cre-
ates for conceptual modelling, nor its intel-
lectual significance. In fact it would be a rather
substantial finding to determine the matter
one way or the other. (Renear et al., 2005,
p. 178)
My claim is that resolution no. (2) is not false
after all, and below I will discuss how the
Conceptual Reference Model (CIDOC-CRM, 2005)
will solve a similar problem in my example text.
Consequently, the major part of this article is
concerned with resolution no. (2).
3 Text andModel—An Observation
When modelling a reading of a text, some of the
information placed in the model is, semantically
speaking, based on the text itself to the extent that
the truth conditions of the text are equal to the
truth conditions of the modelled information.
Our sentence [1] above would normally be con-
sidered to be false if the speaker was a woman or a
child, both as part of text and in a model based on
the text.
Other types of language usage represents differ-
ent truth conditions for the text compared to the
ones for the model, e.g. sentence [2] below:
[2] He said he was from Paris
This sentence would normally be true even if the
man saying it was from another place, as long as he
did indeed say he was from Paris. In a model, on the
other hand, there will often be good reasons to
model the fact [3] based on sentence [2].
[3] x is from Paris.
This fact represents different truth conditions
compared to sentence [2]. The model then requires
additional information in order to convey this.
Below, I will describe the way in which this
The Exhibition Problem
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 29
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
additional information is entered into the model,
as this will be a part of my suggested solution to
Renear’s problem, and as there are important
similarities between sentences such as [2] and the
sentences using names, which I will discuss
below. At this point, I will only remark that these
are the same types of truth conditions as the
ones we find in e.g. ‘that-sentences’, which are well
known from semantics and also discussed by
Frege as ‘abstrakten Nennsa¨tzen’ (Frege, 1892,
p. 37 ff.)
When models like these are used to create
databases, one of the uses of the database will be
to return information based on questions (queries)
from a user. Often, the answers from the database
will be presented and/or interpreted as answers
from the texts on which the database is based.
Regarding the examples above, typical questions
could be: is the person young or old? Is the person
male or female? What is the birthplace of the
person? The answers to the first two questions
will be based on the truth values of text [1], whereas
the third question could not be answered based on
truth values in text [2] only.
Because the results returned from such a query
system is not only based on the statements asserted
by the source texts on which the system is based,
but also on statements exhibited by them, it is useful
to have a layer above the question–answer mecha-
nism. In this top layer, general rules of what data to
base searches on may be defined. This will be seen
by a user as similar to options such as ‘Give me
answers from text A only’ or ‘Give me answers from
all texts in this collection’, but will not be based
on text choices. It will be based on the way in which
the facts in the database are based on the source
text. One option may be: ‘Base answers only on
assertions made by the text’ whereas another may
be: ‘Include assertions made by voices (characters
making assertions) in the text exhibited by the text.’
It may even be interesting to have a choice between
which voices in the text to base answers on, as well
as to calculate possible contradictions between the
assertions in the system. These may be contra-
dictions between assertions based on the same voice
as well as contradictions based on assertions made
by different voices.
4 My Example Text
The text used in my example is based on the work
of Major Peter Schnitler. In the 1740s, Major
Schnitler was appointed by the Danish government
to explore the border area between the northern
parts of Norway and Sweden/Finland. Significant
parts of the text in the manuscript that he handed
over to the Danish government consist of transcripts
of local court interviews that were carried out by
Schnitler in order to gather information about the
local population as well as what they had to say
about the border areas. The material includes infor-
mation directly relevant to the border question, as
well as general information of the areas in question,
which corresponds to similar material collected
through work carried out in Europe at the time
(Burke, 2000, p. 128 ff.).
The text fragments below are taken from the very
first meeting described in the text (English transla-
tion from Danish by me):
[6] Of the Witnesses, supposed to be the most
Cunning on the border issue, Were and stood
up in the court 1: Ole Larsen Riise, [. . .]
[7] For these the Kingly order was read out
loud [. . .] and they gave their Bodily Oath
[. . .]
[8] Question: 1: What his name is? Answer:
Ole Larsen Riise (Schnitler, 1962, p. 1)
4.1 Readings of the example sentences
In these quotes, we find that several facts are
asserted by the text. Sentence [6] claims the exis-
tence of a witness. We will call this witness x. Being
a witness implies being a person. Thus, x is a person.
We may also note that x is referred to by using
the name ‘Ole Larsen Riise.’, abbreviated OLR
subsequently.
Sentence [7] claims that a group of people,
among them the person we call x, made an oath to
speak the truth. Sentence [8] conveys that person x
claims that his name is OLR. The source of the
naming is person x, as spoken out loud at a specific
place at a specific date in 1742 (the specification
of the date is not included in the text fragment
above). In this way, the text puts forward an
assertion by person x that he is named OLR.
Ø. Eide
30 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
My semantic model of these facts will include the
four assertions in Table 1. The assertions are not the
only ones that may be read from the text, but they
are the most important ones for our modelling
purpose. Note the source of each assertion, which
is the entity responsible for the assertion. We may
say that the source of each assertion is the one
guaranteeing that the assertion is true.
4.2 CIDOC-CRM models
CIDOC-CRM is a modelling language, an ontology
in the computer science sense of the word, which
can be used to describe the implicit and explicit
concepts and relationships found in cultural heri-
tage documentation (CIDOC-CRM, 2005). In this
case, a small subset of the concepts (entities, called
Es) and relationships (called Ps) are used in order to
model the reading of the text described above.
The CIDOC-CRM is not developed as a tool for
the modelling of readings of texts as it is used in this
article, but I find it to be a good tool to apply to
exercises such as ours.
The model in Fig. 1 contains the basic facts from
the first three assertions in Table 1. The facts are
focused on the event of making an oath. This event
was carried out by a person. Through this event, the
oath as a conceptual object was created, and it was
documented in Schnitler’s text.
In this figure, as well as in the following figures
subsequently, the boxes containing names starting
with an E represent entities, whereas the ovals with
names starting with a P represent the properties
linking them together.
The modelling of the naming event from
assertion (4) in Table 1 is shown in Fig. 2. The
event through which the attribute was assigned
(the naming event, a speech act) is an E13 Attribute
assignment which states that x carried out this
particular speech act, as seen in Fig. 2. The part of
the model where the responsibility for the naming is
shown is the P14 Carried out by, which indicates
that person x was the one carrying out the naming.
Note also that all of the four assertions can easily
be combined in a single CIDOC-CRM model, as
seen in Fig. 3. Here we also see clearly in what way
both the events are documented in Schnitler’s book.
4.3 The assertions in the example
sentences revisited
When looking at these two model figures, it is
striking to what extent the modelling of the giving
E65 Creation event (give oath)
P14 Carried out by P94 Has created P70 Is documented in
E21 Person (x) E73 Information object(the oath)
E31 Schnitlers book (the
conceptual object)
Fig. 1 CIDOC-CRM model based on assertions 1–3 from Table 1
Table 1 Assertions from sentences 6–8
Assertion Source
(1) There is an x who
is a witness
The text
(2) x is a person The meaning of the word
‘witness’ and ‘person’
in this context
(3) x gave an oath The text
(4) OLR is the name
of person x
x. Note: This is based on
sentence [8]. The reference
to his name in sentence [6]
is not included in the models
in order to keep them as
simple as possible.
The Exhibition Problem
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 31
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of the oath in Fig. 1 compares to the naming of x in
Fig. 2. The explanation is that they are similar sit-
uations. Our traditional way of reading them made
us structure them differently in Table 1, whereas
represented in the CIDOC-CRM structure they
came out the same in Figs 1 and 2. In order to
present explicitly in what way they correspond,
note that line 4 from Table 1 above could be
rewritten as seen in Table 2.
This is a good example of the way modelling
may help us understand a text better. What we have
done is to rethink the difference between an event
(x gave an oath) and a fact (ORL is the name of x).
In order to model the fact correctly, i.e. to show
that it was exhibited rather than asserted in the text,
we had to consider it a naming event. Considering
E13 Attribute Assignment
P141 Assigned
P140 Assigned attribute
to
P14 Carried out by
E82 Actor appelation
(OLR) E21 Person (x)
E65 Creation event (give oath)
P14 Carried out by
P94 Has created
P70 Is documented in
E31 Schnitlers book (the
conceptual object)
P70 Is documented in
E73 Information
object (the oath)
Fig. 3 The CIDOC-CRM models from Figures 1 and 2 combined
E13 Attribute Assignment
P141 Assigned P140 Assigned attribute to P14 Carried out by
E82 Actor appelation (OLR) E21 Person (x) E21 Person (x)
P70 Is documented in
E31 Schnitlers book (the
conceptual object)
Fig. 2 CIDOC-CRM model based on assertion 4 from Table 1
Table 2 Assertions from Table 1 with number 4 rewritten
Assertion Source
(1) There is an x who
is a witness
The text
(2) x is a person The meaning of the
word ‘witness’ and
‘person’ in this context
(3) x gave an oath The text
(4) x named himself OLR The text
Ø. Eide
32 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
it an event is more feasible in that an event
typically has actors who are responsible for the
outcome. Further, this makes more sense in that
both expressions are speech acts. When it is
considered a speech act, the naming event is the
same kind of event as the making of an oath.
5 Why Renear’s Solution No. 2
is not False After All
In order to be able to see the problem with Renear’s
solution no. 2, or to realize that the problem is not
really there, we have to read his text in extensio:
Another approach, this one anticipated from
the Semantic Web community, is simply to
insist on an unambiguous corrected concep-
tual representation: one arc for being named
‘‘Herman Melville’’, one for authoring Moby
Dick. But this resolution fails for the reasons
presented in the preceding section. Although
this model would be in some sense an accurate
representation of ‘‘how the world is’’ accord-
ing to the document, it would not represent
what is asserted by the document. The author-
ship arc in the corrected RDF graph model will
correspond to relationships of exhibition, not
assertion; and there is no accommodation for
this distinction in the modelling language.
(Renear et al., 2005, p. 178)
In the first couple of sentences of this paragraph, the
resolution of using an ‘unambiguous corrected con-
ceptual representation’ is said to have failed. In the
next couple of sentences Renear weakens his state-
ment by saying that only RDF does not accom-
modate this; ‘there is no accommodation for this
distinction in the modelling language’ (my empha-
sis). There are no arguments to support why a
different modelling language could not solve the
problem. In fact, the CIDOC-CRM does solve this,
by giving the modeller an opportunity to state
explicitly who is the source of an assertion, as
demonstrated in Fig. 2.
By showing that the problem can be solved in
CIDOC-CRM, we have also shown that the problem
can be solved in an RDF system. This is because
a document from ICS-FORTH shows that
CIDOC-CRM can be expressed in RDF Schema
(CIDOC-CRM, 2006), which implies that the
solution described above can be expressed in RDF.
On the other hand, one has to agree that the
distinction between assertion and exhibition is
not often spelled out in RDF–in fact, I have never
seen it. Indeed, even models in which authors of
books seem to be strings of characters rather
than human beings are not uncommon. An example
of this can be found in Miller’s introductory text,
where he models the text ‘John Smith is the author
of Document 1’ in a way which gives the impression
that the author is the string ‘John Smith’ and
not a human being referred to by this string
(Miller, 1998).
What remains is that if my argument in this
article is correct, i.e. if the CIDOC-CRM can handle
the exhibition problem, then a solution can be made
in RDF as well because any CIDOC-CRM model can
be expressed in RDF.
6 Generalization
The example described above is quite unusual
in that it includes an explicit naming. But it
can be argued that all personal names, at least
in eighteenth-century Scandinavia, are based on
naming events, as people are normally baptized.
One may even argue that this is always true, as a
name has to be attributed in one way or another in
order to be used. As long as we believe that this is
the case, we can include into the model an explicit
attribute assignment event as the one in Fig. 2 for
each name found in the text.
With respect to this naming event, we do not
know who carried it out or when it took place. That
is not necessarily a problem. In CIDOC-CRM, the
modelling of entities we presume to exist without
knowing who or what they are is quite possible.
And there will always be things we do not know
when we read historical texts. What may be a
problem is that the naming event we model in this
way is an event that is not documented in the text
we are basing the model upon. Whether this is
acceptable or not is a decision one has to make
when building up these kinds of models.
The Exhibition Problem
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 33
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Let us return to the following sentence discussed
above:
[4] Moby Dick was written by Herman
Melville.
Based on my reading of the sentence, we can
extract the assertions shown in Table 3. All the
assertions are in some way based on the text, but in
some cases more world knowledge is required than
in other cases. This is indicated in the source
column in Table 3.
Note that the events e1 and e2 are not described
in the text; they are included because they are
required in order for something to have a name, and
because I need them in order to reach a solution to
the exhibition problem.
6.1 CIDOC-CRM models
We do not have any direct documentation for event
e1 in the text [4], which is the E13 Attribute
Assignment in Fig. 4. The event is assumed to have
taken place because the name is used. The person
responsible for the naming, v, could be any legal or
physical person. The naming event could be a
formal naming, such as a baptism. There may be
many events which we could use as e1. The reason
for stating that such an event exists is that for a
name to be usable in communication, it has to exist
when it is used, and in order to exist, it must have
come into existence at some point.
V is here not related to any other person, unlike
x in the earlier naming event (self-naming). The
fact that the person is not related to any other
person in the model, and the fact that the naming
event is not documented in the text, implies that
the naming is exhibited (or presupposed, or both)
in the text.
In Fig. 5, a similar E13 Attribute Assignment is the
event e2 in Table 3. Note that I assume that the
person naming the novel Moby Dick is y, the person
who wrote the book and who is known by the name
Herman Melville. This is a fact I choose to include
in the model because I believe it to be true, but
I have no source for this, and I could very well be
wrong.
And, to complete the modelling, the assertion
‘y wrote z’ in Table 3 is modelled in Fig. 6. Note
that the creation event is documented in sentence
[4]. It would now be easy to combine these
three models as demonstrated in the combination
of the first two models in Fig. 3, but this is not done
here.
By including the naming of HM in the model of
Fig. 4, and by not stating in the model that the
E13 Attribute Assignment
P141 Assigned P140 Assigned attribute to P14 Carried out by
E82 Actor appelation (HM) E21 Person (y) E21 Person (v)
Fig. 4 CIDOC-CRM model of naming event e1, the naming of Melville
Table 3 Assertions from sentence 4
Assertion Source
There exist a person y [4] and world knowledge
y is named HM naming event e1
There exist a work z [4] and world knowledge
z is named MD naming event e2
y wrote z [4]
There exist a person v Extra-textual world knowledge
v named y HM in e1 Extra-textual world knowledge
y named z MD in e2 Extra-textual world knowledge
(or just a guess?)
Ø. Eide
34 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
naming is documented in the text, we may infer
that:
(1) The naming is known when the text is read,
but
(2) The text does not put forward the naming as
an assertion.
This is very close to saying that what the model
expresses is a presupposition. This then takes us
back to Renear’s resolution no. (3), i.e. that
exhibition is a special case of presupposition.
But even if this is so, i.e. that exhibition is a
special case of presupposition, it does not necessarily
follow that a model expressing a presupposition also
expresses an exhibition, as it does not follow from
‘all p’s are q’ that ‘all q’s are p’. So the relationship
between the model in Fig. 4 and text [4] is, in my
opinion, not yet entirely clear. It is not enough to
show that we have modelled a presupposition,
because it does not necessarily follow from that,
that we have modelled an exhibition as well.
With respect to the first part of this article, note
also that when a model is built, facts based on
assertions in the text will have the same truth value
in the text as in the model, whereas when model-
ling facts that are merely exhibited in the text,
a difference in terms of truth values may appear.
This happens when we model facts that are
exhibited in the text as assertions in the model.
When we do that, it is vital to include the source of
the assertion in the model in order to make sure
that the text is not considered as evidence for an
assertion in the model which is based on something
only exhibited in the text. It may be the case that
E13 Attribute Assignment
P141 Assigned P140 Assigned attribute to P14 Carried out by
E35 Title (MD) E33 Linguistic
object (z) E21 Person (y)
Fig. 5 CIDOC-CRM model of naming event e2, the naming of Moby Dick
E65 Creation event
P14 Carried out by P94 Has created P70 Is documented in
E21 Person (y) E33 Linguistic object (z) E33 Lingustic object ([4])
Fig. 6 CIDOC-CRM model of the writing of Moby Dick by Melville
The Exhibition Problem
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 35
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a similar method could be used in modelling the
‘that-sentences’ mentioned above.
7 Conclusion
There is reason to believe that the problem
described in Renear’s paper is an important
one. But there is a solution to the problem. I have
argued that for one specific type of text, i.e. when
somebody explicitly names himself, the problem
may be solved by using CIDOC-CRM modelling
including explicit statements of the sources of the
assertions exhibited in the text. I have also presented
this as a possible solution to the more general
situation without explicit naming. Further research
may disclose whether this solution will apply to
other linguistic constructions as well, e.g. ‘that-
sentences’.
It is worth noting that behind this solution lies
the fact that we are using an event-oriented method,
since this is an important part of the way CIDOC-
CRM works. This is an indication that some of the
problems with previous methods is that they do not
include the dynamic aspects of reading and under-
standing a text. It would be interesting to study in
which way CIDOC-CRM can be related to semantic
theories such as discourse representation theory
(Kamp and Reyle, 1993).
In the self-naming modelled in Figs 2 and 3, the
CIDOC-CRM model makes it explicit as to who is
responsible for the naming, and thereby shows that
it is merely reported by the text. Based on this it
follows that the naming is exhibited in and/or
presupposed by the text.
In the naming of HM modelled in Fig. 4, the
model states that somebody is responsible for the
naming, but does not relate that person to the text.
Based on this it can be argued that the naming is
merely reported by the text, and thus that the
naming is exhibited in and/or presupposed by the
text. But this argument is weaker than the argument
above concerning the self-naming.
It would have been an improvement if I could be
able to express more clearly the fact that the naming
is merely exhibited in the case of the latter naming,
but I cannot see how that could be done in a
CIDOC-CRM context. This is a problem that
requires further research.
The difference between assertion and exhibition
has not been modelled directly in any of the two
examples. The difference is modelled indirectly by
using attribute assignments with explicit responsi-
bility. This method requires further study and
development in order to enable me to establish its
fidelity.
References
Burke, P. (2000). A Social History of Knowledge: From
Gutenberg to Diderot. Cambridge: Polity Press.
CIDOC-CRM (2005). Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual
Reference Model. Produced by the ICOM/CIDOC
Documentation Standards Group, continued by the
CIDOC CRM Special Interest Group. Version 4.2, June
2005.
CIDOC-CRM (2006). CIDOC CRM v4.2 Encoded in
RDFS/Created by ICS-FORTH. http://cidoc.ics.
forth.gr/rdfs/cidoc_v4.2.rdfs (accessed 27 September
2006).
Eide, Ø. (2003). Putting the dialogue back together:
re-creating structure in letter publishing. Computers
and the Humanities, 37(1): 65–75.
Frege, G. (1892). U¨ber Sinn und Bedeutung, Zeitschrift
fu¨r Philosophie und philosophische Kritik, NF, 100:
25–50.
Holmen, J. and Uleberg, E. (1996). Getting the most out
of it – SGML-encoding of archaeological texts. Paper at
the IAAC’96 Iasi, Romania. http://www.dokpro.uio.no/
engelsk/text/getting_most_out_of_it.html (accessed
14 November 2005).
Holmen, J., Jordal, E. K. A., Olsen, S. A., and Ore, C. E.
(2007). From XML encoded text to objects and events
in a CRM compatible database. A case study. Article
based on a paper at Beyond the Artifact, CAA 2004,
Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in
Archaeology. http://www.edd.uio.no/artiklar/arkeologi/
jordal_caa2004.pdf (accessed 7 November 2007).
Kamp, H. and Reyle, U. (1993). From Discourse to Logic.
Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics of Natural
Language, Formal Logic and Discourse Representation
Theory. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
McCarty, W. (2005). Humanities Computing. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Ø. Eide
36 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Miller, E. (1998) ‘An Introduction to the
Resource Description Framework’. D-lib magazine,
May 1998.
Renear, A. H., Mylonas, E., and Durand, D. G. (1996).
Refining our notion of what text really is: the problem
of overlapping hierarchies. In Hockey, S and Ide, N.
(eds), Research in Humanities Computing 4: Selected
Papers from the ALLC/ACH Conference, Christ Church
Oxford, April 1992. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 263–80.
Renear, A. H., Lee, J. H., Choi, Y., and Xiang, X. (2005).
Exhibition: a problem for conceptual modeling in
the Humanities. In: ACH/ALLC 2005. Conference
Abstracts. 2nd Edition, Victoria: Humanities
Computing and Media Centre, University of Victoria,
pp. 176–179.
Schnitler, P. (1962). Major Peter Schnitlers grenseeksami-
nasjonsprotokoller 1742-1745. Bind 1 [Major Peter
Schnitler’s border examination protocols 1742–45.
Volume 1]. Oslo: Norsk historisk kjeldeskrift-institutt.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., Dubin, D., Huitfeldt, C., and
Renear, A. H. (2002). Drawing inferences on the basis
of markup. In Usdin, B. T. and Newcomb, S. R. (eds),
Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages 2002.
Montreal, Canada. http://www.idealliance.org/papers/
extreme/Proceedings/xslfo-pdf/2002/CMSMcQ01/EML
2002CMSMcQ01.pdf (accessed 29 September 2006).
TEI (2002). TEI P4: Guidelines for Electronic Text
Encoding and Interchange/Sperberg-McQueen, C. M.
and Burnard, L. (eds.) Text Encoding Initiative
Consortium. XML Version: Oxford, Providence,
Charlottesville, Bergen.
The Exhibition Problem
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 1, 2008 37
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
