
1 Introduction
The numerous visual metaphors that are used to
describe our cognitive processes hint at the nexus
of relationships between what we see and what we
think. We say we ‘see’ when we mean that we ‘under-
stand’; we try to organize and make our ideas
‘clear’ by bringing them into ‘focus’, and so on.
When faced with tasks that require substantial
thought or organization of ideas we will often
reach for a pen and paper to ‘sketch out’ (another
visual metaphor) our thoughts. There exists an
instinctive deep understanding that one can enhance
one’s thought processes by finding ways of linking
external perception with internal mental processes.
Graphic aids to thinking are not new, but the emer-
gence of digital technology has created a new
medium for these tools that provides extended func-
tionality and many new opportunities for develop-
ment. This in turn offers the potential for new
research methodologies that amplify cognition.
These serve two distinct purposes, one of which is
sometimes described by the use of the hackneyed
phrase ‘A picture is worth ten thousand words’.1
However, this misses the true purpose of visualiza-
tion as what is being described by that phrase is
simply a matter of transmission, i.e. of having high
bandwidth to transmit large volumes of information.
Arguably such transmission is not even ‘communi-
cation’ as it is unidirectional, a monologue rather
Correspondence:
Martyn Jessop, Centre for
Computing in the
Humanities, King’s College
London Strand, London
WC2R 2LS, UK.
E-mail:
martyn.jessop@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
281
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn016 Advance Access Published on 5 September 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
than a conversation. Of far greater importance is the
ability of these tools to allow visual perception to be
used in the creation or discovery of new knowledge.
However, knowledge is not transferred, revealed,
or perceived, but is created through a dynamic pro-
cess. This raises epistemological issues concerning
visualization and points the way to an intellectual
approach to the subject.
It is necessary at the outset to define what it is
that is meant by ‘scholarly activity’. Many of the
definitions are surprisingly circular; scholarly activ-
ity being something which is done by scholars who
are in turn defined by being those who conduct
scholarly activity. It is known instinctively that
scholarly activity is about the discovery, exchange,
interpretation, and presentation of knowledge but
what is it precisely? While one may not always com-
mend Wikipedia to students it does, in this case,
provide a useful set of simple statements describing
scholarly method: ‘the body of principles and prac-
tices used by scholars to make their claims about the
world as valid and trustworthy as possible, and to
make them known to the scholarly public’.2 There
are two aspects to this: one governs the conduct of
research, the other the dissemination of the details
and outcomes of that research to other scholars, and
maybe the public at large. The Wikipedia entry con-
tinues, ‘This article focuses on scholarship in the
narrower sense, covering rational inquiry in areas
that are mostly too complex to yet be treated by
science. These include history as well as the crea-
tions of the human mind in the form of art,
music, literature, religion, philosophy, and cultural
beliefs.’3 This refers to disciplines that are at the
heart of humanities research and helps us draw
a distinction between ‘scientific visualization’ and
‘humanistic visualization’. The digital humanities
are taking what is perceived by the public to be
the tool of the scientist and using it to conduct
‘rational enquiry in areas that are mostly too com-
plex to yet be treated by science’.4 Ultimately the
approaches used in humanities computing will
therefore, in the main, be substantially different
from those used in the sciences and one could jus-
tifiably describe them as belonging to a field of
‘Humanistic Visualization’. While this prospect is
very gratifying for those of us working in the area
a further question will inevitably be raised by
our peers, of whether what we are doing is simply
developing a ‘method’5 or contributing to a ‘meth-
odology’?6 The difference is perhaps of being
regarded either as ‘technicians’ or ‘scholars’.
What is ‘visualization’? Some would define it as a
group of techniques (methods) for creating images,
diagrams, or animations to communicate a message.
This form of visualization has utilized visual imag-
ery as an effective way to communicate both
abstract and concrete ideas throughout human his-
tory. Examples include cave paintings, Egyptian
hieroglyphs, ancient Greek geometry, and the tech-
nical drawings of Leonardo da Vinci. The use of
images for communication during the larger part
of our history is reflected in images produced by
hand or those reproduced in print media. This his-
torical perspective raises three important questions,
each of which has a bearing upon an examination
of digital visualization as a scholarly activity:
 What role have visualizations played in human-
ities scholarship in the past?
 If the majority of images in print are to be
regarded as ‘illustrations’ what is the distinction
between ‘visualization’ and ‘illustration’?
 How has the emergence of digital media affected
the development of visualization?
First, the definition of ‘visualization’ can be
completed by examining the second question;
‘how does visualization differ from the forms of
graphical representation that have been used to pro-
duce illustrations throughout history?’ For example,
few would regard the devotional art of the late
Middle Ages as mere illustration. St Augustine and
St Thomas Aquinas argued that physical images
could be used by worshippers to envision the
divine through prayer. These were not just illustra-
tions of religious figures and events, they were
images that were intended to assist thought and,
depending on your personal beliefs, higher mental
and metaphysical processes. Jean Gerson, a theolo-
gian and Chancellor of the University of Paris in
the early fifteenth century wrote about learning to
transcend with our minds from visible things to the
invisible, from the corporeal to the spiritual. He saw
this as the purpose of the image (Donovan, 2007).
M. Jessop
282 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Although the distinction between illustration and
visualization is a topic rich with possibilities
for discussion, I must skirt around this question
as this article concerns digital visualization and
I believe it is in the ‘digital’ that digital visualiza-
tion can go beyond mere method to become
methodology.
A digital visualization differs from a printed illus-
tration in two related characteristics:
 It is interactive.
 It allows manipulation of both the graphical
representation and the data it is derived from.
However, these criteria apply to virtually all
graphics produced by computers; a scatter graph
plotted using a spreadsheet can be part of an inter-
active and iterative process of exploration as the
user refines the display, selecting different subsets
of the data to display, changing scales or line fitting
algorithms, or performing statistical operations
upon the data. In many respects, it is therefore
correct to describe a spreadsheet as a visualization
application, at least in the style of its usage, as it is
effectively applying a visualization interface to a
method of exploratory data analysis. Clearly this is
not an adequate description of digital visualization.
A visualization departs from being an illustration
when it becomes the principal medium of commu-
nication. The term ‘Illustration’ implies an image
which serves only to support written language;
thus the main carrier of information is the asso-
ciated text not the image. Many consider that an
image can only be a true visualization when it is
the primary carrier of information, not a supple-
ment to a piece of text. I shall settle on a distinction
in which an illustration is intended merely to
support a rhetorical device (usually textual) whereas
a visualization is intended either to be the primary
rhetorical device or serve as an alternative but par-
allel (rather than subordinate) rhetorical device.
This indicates where attention needs to be focused
in order to determine what is required to ensure
that digital visualization is seen to have the intellec-
tual rigour expected of a scholarly activity.
There is a broader issue which concerns the
emphasis that humanities scholars place on written
language and their apparent mistrust of images.
This arguably has a justifiable basis in historical
fact; William Ivins has written about the limitations
of images in scholarship from ancient times to the
relatively recent past of our print culture that were
due to the difficulties of producing what he calls
‘exactly repeatable images’ (Ivins, 1969). He argues
that it has been impossible to use images to dissem-
inate ideas because of the problems of reproducing
them accurately. This mistrust also has a philoso-
phical underpinning by philosophers from Plato to
Descartes (and beyond). Space does not permit this
past history to be discussed here, but it is inevitably
reflected in attitudes towards visualization in the
present day. I suspect that part of the problem
also lies in the apparent ‘newness’ of digital visual-
ization. To counter this I will seek to establish a
context for digital visualization in established schol-
arly method. The discussion will then proceed to the
problems that that ‘newness’ presents and, finally,
some guidelines to ensure the intellectual integrity
of digital visualization work.
2 Visualization in the
Digital Humanities
There are many ways of structuring an examination
of the use of visualization in the humanities; by
discipline, by type of information structure, and so
on. To set the context for this article, I have chosen
to look at the type of data that is being visualized.
I will not discuss them in depth here as the purpose
is to indicate the scope of the visualization methods
that I am referring to. In practice, the boundaries of
each data type are blurred and each has an impor-
tance beyond its immediate scope, but a starting
point could be as follows:
 Space—the study of spatial relationships and a
sense of place occur in many humanities disci-
plines. This area is dominated by Geographical
Information System (GIS) software which was
developed for scientific data that exhibits a
high density of precise information, but is not
ideally suited to the more sparse ‘fuzzy’ quanti-
tative or qualitative data used in the humanities.
From a humanist’s viewpoint, it is interesting
that Denis Wood argues that the impulse to
Digital visualization as a scholarly activity
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 283
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
write history and to draw maps (geography)
sprang from the same source; the need for early
civilizations to control their societies (Wood,
1992). Maps are thought of as spatial devices
but there is also a temporal as well as spatial
dimension to the need for such civilizations to
record qualitative and quantitative information.
Digital dynamic maps are one of many alterna-
tives offering media that are better suited to
humanists (Jessop, 2006). In digital visualization
tools such as GIS, or projects such as the Valley of
the Shadow7 or Salem Witch Trials,8 there exists a
form of visualization that combines time, space,
quantitative data, and qualitative data. The
Electronic Cultural Atlas Initiative (ECAI)9 with
its utilization of Timemap10 provides an indica-
tion of possible future trends. The study of the
human use of space also finds expression
through the discipline of Space Syntax,11 which
originated in the fields of architecture and urban
design to assess the social effects of different
designs for living spaces (Hillier and Hanson,
1986). In recent years, it has been applied by
archaeologists and anthropologists, among
others, and is pertinent to another aspect of
visualization; the application of 3D visualization
to studies of cultural heritage in Virtual Realities.
However, space is important not only because of
the obvious spatial data applications of maps and
GIS but also because it is at the heart of all
visualizations. The process of visualizing infor-
mation always involves spatializing data even
when that data may not be intuitively spatial.
For example, the data used by John Burrows to
plot graphs of idiolects in the novels of Jane
Austin (Burrows, 1987) is not intuitively spatial
but space must be introduced into it in order to
explore patterns and relationships within the
data through visualizations such as graphs.
Spatialization adds extra dimensionality that is
absent from written language and in doing so
facilitates the display of simultaneity.
 Quantitative data—quantitative analysis and
visualization has been an established tool in
many humanities disciplines for a long time. It
can be found in generic statistical analysis soft-
ware or embedded in specialized applications
such as those used in text analysis. It is gradually
permeating into new areas of the humanities
through work such as that of Franco Moretti
who has argued for a wider application of quan-
titative methods in disciplines such as literary
history (Moretti, 2005).
 Text—a great many of the visualization methods
applied to text are derived from analytical quan-
titative methods that were originally borrowed
from the sciences. This is an interesting area of
application because there are also other more
imaginative visualization tools that owe more
to the arts than the sciences. Projects such as
TAPoR12 combine these seamlessly in a single
resource for the community. Visualization tech-
niques using tables and graphs have been com-
monplace in text analysis for many years. These
are sometimes variants of statistical visualiza-
tions of numeric data (as in word frequencies),
but in other cases they are more specialized
visual forms of text analysis. Projects such as
TAPoR and NORA13 are developing imaginative
new visual forms and applications. These new
methods apply not just to the visual representa-
tion of the results of analysis, but also to the
visualization of the texts themselves. The aim is
to support interpretive scholarship by allowing
areas or relationships of interest to be identified
within large volumes of text. Projects have
explored specific texts in this way for many
years, for example Dante’s Inferno,14 but there
is substantial scope for a tool that could be
applied to any text. The use of the word ‘tool’
here should not be taken to imply that this is a
computational problem as the problems being
grappled with are conceptual not technical. For
example, what is a text? How should it be dis-
played visually? Humanities computing provides
a myriad of possibilities of representation; uni-
dimensional or two-dimensional physical
objects, abstract objects showing relations
among words or between words and annotations,
and animations. Further questions arise from
this work; is there a need for representational
as well as interpretive markup? What are the
relationships between text visualization and the
interpretation of texts? The visualizing of texts is
M. Jessop
284 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
also an area which links humanities computing
work to the arts; for example the interactive
installation Text Rain15 by Camille Utterback
and Romy Achituv. There is a movement
towards tools in which aesthetics are as impor-
tant as analysis, which in turn draw the human-
ities closer to the arts. The material culture of
textual objects also offers opportunities for
visualization, for example in manuscript studies
and projects, such as Turning the Pages16 at the
British Library.
 Time. Tools such as timelines allow one to
explore the development of complex historical
events and the inter-relationships between pre-
cursor events. They are of obvious value in the
study of history, where later events build upon
earlier ones but they can also be applied else-
where. Historiography and literary criticism are
both histories of accumulated comments on a
subject. Matt Jensen has developed a number of
timeline tools which are intended to answer the
styles of questions that are asked by humanists;
for example in the case of political scandals,
questions of the style ‘who knew what and
when’, or for exploring the response to an
author’s writing over a period of many years
(Jensen, 2003, 2006). Before Denis Wood wrote
of the links between geography and history, the
eighteen century historian Jacques Barbeau-
Dubourg saw history as the study of two ancillary
fields; geography; and chronology (Wainer,
2005). At that time geography was a relatively
young and rapidly developing discipline and he
believed that the processes of visualizing geogra-
phy through cartography had many parallels
with the visualization of time which would, he
believed, continue to develop in parallel with it.
Sadly chronology, perhaps better termed chrono-
graphy, did not develop as a distinct discipline as
both geography and cartography did. However, a
study of the visualization processes of map
making does allow one to draw out some general
principles of visualization. The challenges tackled
by cartographers in the representation of 3D
space on flat print media became an order of
magnitude greater when a further dimension,
that of time, was added. Despite this there are
a number of successful examples from the past;
for example Charles Minard’s 1861 narrative
graphic of Napoleon’s ill-fated campaign against
Russia in 1812 where time, geography, and quan-
titative data are presented in such as way that the
scale, location, and timing of the loss of
Napoleon’s troops during the entire campaign
can be assimilated at a glance (Robinson, 1967;
Tufte, 1983, 2006). In many respects, this style of
graphic has been neglected since the advent of
digital tools because the techniques used to con-
struct diagrams of this type are not easily imple-
mented in software. They are, however, of
enormous value to the humanities in the study
of narratives and the relationships between
people, events, and artefacts.
 3D Visualization—much of this work has
centred upon visualizations of the built environ-
ment. This is of interest not only to historians
and archaeologists but also to anyone who seeks
to find out how the buildings of the past worked
in human terms. For example, the Theatre of
Pompey17 and Theatron18 projects are based on
historical and archaeological data but are pri-
marily of interest to scholars of theatre studies.
The 3D visualization is of special interest in the
context of this article because the sophistication
of its imagery and advanced applications can
make it a form of visualization that is vulnerable
to criticisms of a lack of intellectual rigour (and
where the absence of an established scholarly
apparatus poses most problems). To counter
these criticisms a great deal of work is currently
being focused on defining not only good practice
(ICT Methods Network19), but also principles
for maintaining the intellectual integrity of
such work, for example the London Charter.20
This work, especially documents such as the
London Charter, may therefore provide pointers
for similar work in the development of a broader
field of humanistic visualization.
Any demarcations between the applications of
visualization in different disciplines are miscon-
ceived as there is a great deal of common ground.
This offers considerable potential for the digital
humanities and it is here that attention needs to
be focused if digital visualization is to achieve
Digital visualization as a scholarly activity
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 285
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
recognition as a rigorous intellectual activity in
research and teaching.
3 A Context for Digital
Visualization in Humanities
Scholarship
Establishing a context for digital visualization and
the use of images in the humanities is important for
two reasons. First, to demonstrate that the approach
is not entirely new and that there are precedents that
can be drawn upon. Second, as visualizations are a
subset of images as a whole if the acceptance of
visualization as a scholarly activity suffers from the
attitudes held towards images in general, where can
one look for more positive examples of the use of
visual sources?
David Staley identifies six types of representa-
tional and abstract visual secondary sources that
are used by historians but his taxonomy
(Staley,2003) applies equally well to all humanists.
His categories are as follows:
 Galleries of images.
 Museums and collections of objects.
 Film, television, and other moving images.
 Dramatic re-creations.
 Maps and atlases.
 Pictures of data.
To these I would add a further category:
 Single images.
His contention is that these visual structures are
as useful as verbal structures in organizing our
thoughts about the past and communicating these
thoughts to others.
In this context, galleries of images are not simply
collections of images but they are visual displays in
which the spatial arrangement of visual primary
sources takes precedence over the linguistic arrange-
ment of any written sources associated with them.
Information is communicated to the viewer through
the images and their deliberate juxtaposition. The
careful arrangement of these images allows viewers
to discern patterns and relationships. Photographs
in scholarly publications are frequently used as
surrogates for primary sources and they generally
feature a written caption that identifies the source,
makes a comment of interpretation, and hints at
ways that the visual source relates to the written
account. Images are usually used singularly or if
used with other images there may not be a mean-
ingful arrangement or juxtaposition between them.
David Hackett-Fischer’s Liberty and Freedom: A
Visual History of America’s Founding Ideas is an elo-
quent and scholarly discussion of the development
of the ideas of liberty and freedom in the United
States (Hackett-Fischer, 2005). The book is heavily
illustrated and makes extensive use of images to
explore the iconography associated with those
ideas. It constructs a visual history but only very
rarely does it juxtapose images to impart new mean-
ing. The images are usually presented singularly and
isolated within the text, effectively being surrogates
for primary sources. If primary sources are the arte-
facts themselves and secondary sources are arrange-
ments of those artefacts, there are occasional
secondary sources in Hacket-Fischer’s book when
images are placed alongside each other to allow
comparisons to be made. Thus because the arrange-
ment is purposeful they show evidence of the
author’s syntactic choices, omissions, commissions,
arrangements, and analysis, and so become part of a
visual secondary source. By comparison, John
Berger’s (1972) Ways of Seeing contains a number
of ‘visual essays’. These ‘essays’ have no words, only
a collection of paintings arranged in such a manner
that the viewer is invited to see patterns for them-
selves. The skill and knowledge (and scholarship?)
of the author is expressed through the selection and
arrangement of the images. Berger confirms the
value of these visual essays as scholarly communica-
tion and inquiry when he says they are intended to
raise as many questions as the verbal essays that are
also present in the book. So simply displaying visual
sources is not sufficient for status as a visual sec-
ondary source; there must be some sort of purpose-
ful arrangement or juxtaposition of several images.
The origin of museums and collections of objects in
Western culture can be traced to the ‘cabinets of art
and curiosities’ or Kunstkammern that were popu-
lar between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries.
These were collections of a wide variety of objects
M. Jessop
286 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ranging from natural materials to flora and fauna,
and manmade objects. The intention of the creators
was to collect as many objects from the natural
world as possible; by displaying natural and man-
made objects together, creators of Kunstkammern
sought symbolically to possess and understand the
diversity of the outside world. They were intended
as spaces that would bring order and systematic
thought to the collected objects. These were not
simply jumbled collections of artefacts; each object
was carefully placed in a conscious manner. As with
modern digital visualizations their creators were
seeking patterns and associations between the
objects. The Kunstkammern were primarily tools
for enquiry and can thus be considered a type of
visual secondary source. Many academics found
them useful for theoretical reflection and saw
them as models of the universe where the patterns
of the natural world could be visually displayed.
What is interesting is that the mode of thought
being used was visual and associative not linguistic
and logical (or analytical). Few would dispute that
museum displays are not merely artless collections
of primary sources, their success relies upon the
conscious arrangement of objects into meaningful
patterns. This is a process very similar to arranging
the material for a written monograph about the
same sources. In both cases researchers must make
compositional decisions regarding what to collect
and what to ignore. Decisions must be made con-
cerning the placement of the objects, their juxtapo-
sition, how they should be lit, the design of the
setting, and many other issues of compositional
style. They are an abstraction that has been built
with the application of considerable scholarly, and
other, thought and knowledge derived from the
analysis, interpretation, and synthesis of primary
and secondary sources, and can thus be regarded
as secondary sources themselves.
To understand the importance of film it is neces-
sary to examine another type of experience first.
When one attends a theatre one might expect to
gain some real understanding about human nature
from the people, places, and events that unfold
upon the stage. It is understood that what is being
observed is not reality, but that one can learn
from it all the same if it is meaningful in a way
that takes it beyond mere entertainment. Staley
describes this as a ‘useful fiction’ (Staley, 2003);
the play can be viewed as sharing characteristics
with a scientific (or humanistic) model in that
‘it describes a much simpler universe by including
some features of the actual universe and neglecting
others. It is an abstraction, a model, of reality not
the reality itself’ (Staley, 2003). It can be said to
be ‘useful’ if it generates insights. Film, like theatre,
can also depict vision, sound, speech, body lan-
guage, and movement simultaneously in one
medium. In so doing, it approaches what Arnheim
calls the ‘four-dimensionality of reality’ (Arnheim,
1969). In a text-based piece the processes of selec-
tion and abstraction applied during the writing of
a monograph also make it a useful fiction. Film
does, however exhibit a characteristic that also
afflicts many digital visualizations, in that it is diffi-
cult to display scholarly apparatus, such as bibliog-
raphies, footnotes, and information about context
and content. The space available here does not
permit a discussion of the final four categories (dra-
matic re-creations, maps and atlases, pictures of
data, and single images), but each has different con-
tributions to make to a discussion of the historical
context of visual sources and tools. Their creation
represents valid scholarly activity and forms a con-
tinuum to which digital visualizations are a rela-
tively new addition. Museum displays, films, and
re-enactments are all visualizations that can cap-
ture more of the rich multi-dimensionality of
human experience. They do, however, suffer from
the bane of humanities research: the incomplete
record. This suggests a significant weakness of digi-
tal visualization which will have to be addressed if
its scholarly status is to be ensured. Visual sources
present the viewer with a complete, and convincing,
picture that is often derived from an incomplete
record but the nature of the media used often
requires that the gaps be filled during its creation
and thus concealed. If the applications of represen-
tational and abstract visual secondary sources are to
be regarded as anything other than mere entertain-
ment it must be ensured that viewers are aware of
not only what is present but also what is omitted
and the levels of uncertainty of that which is
present.
Digital visualization as a scholarly activity
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 287
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The preceding discussion shows that the princi-
ples behind digital visualization are not new and
that there is a precedent for the use of visual sources
and visual tools in humanities scholarship. Digital
visualization can be placed in context with estab-
lished methodology and, in common with the digi-
tal humanities as a whole; it forms part of a
continuum of scholarly method not a revolutionary
upheaval of it.
Despite its location in the spectrum of accepted
praxis digital visualization, and perhaps all digital
humanities methodology, does face significant pro-
blems because of its youthfulness. Among these pro-
blems are:
 The lack of a historical background involving
lengthy discussions of theoretical issues and
methodology.
 Measures to ensure the transparency of method,
processes of selection and omission, missing
data, etc.
 A lack of in-built scholarly apparatus.
 A small community of users and practice.
There are other more pragmatic problems but as
these have already been discussed elsewhere in a
different, but highly relevant, context (Jessop,
2008) I will focus primarily on the first two issues
from the above list. However, before discussing
these the issue of visual literacy needs to be
addressed.
4 Visual Literacy in the Arts,
Sciences, and Humanities
I recently attended a workshop which bought
together visualization practitioners from science,
engineering, visual arts, performing arts, and the
humanities. The workshop sought to find intersec-
tions between the visualization methods and appli-
cations of the diverse disciplines represented there.
The technology is largely common to all and there is
a great deal of overlap in the methods applied, but it
was the differences in the aims and views of partici-
pants and of their work that I found most illumi-
nating. There are clearly differences in the
methodologies and aims of the three main groups
with the sciences being analytical, the arts being
creative and expressive, but what of the humanities?
My research concerning the use of GIS in the
humanities has shown me something that I believe
to be true of digital visualization as a whole: that
potentially its greatest value is not for analysis but
for synthesis and modelling. It can be used to draw
material together, compare and combine it, or to
construct models of how, for example, space was
used in the public areas of Ancient Rome, or
develop tools for the more abstract use of space to
visualize data that is not intuitively spatial. This is
an optimistic vision of the future, but there is a very
fundamental obstruction and limitation to the pro-
gress that can be made.
The aims and working practices of the artists
representing the 3D Visualization in the Arts
Network (3DVisA)21 caused me to rethink the
nature and potential of digital visualization in the
humanities. Years of school life, and many of adult-
hood, are spent mastering written language but the
western education system places little effort, or value
on, teaching visual literacy. The natural expectation
of an artist who wishes to work in digital media is
that they will spend many years mastering the
medium. This is time that, in the past, they would
have spent mastering not just the techniques but the
‘language’ of drawing, painting, or sculpture—but
what is this language? In the nineteen century the
Bauhaus movement attempted to define a language
of visual communication and artists such as Paul
Klee and Wassily Kandinsky produced detailed
accounts of their efforts (Kandinsky, 1979). Well-
respected guides such as Donis A. Dondis’s A
Primer of Visual Literacy (Dondis, 1973) were pub-
lished and became standard texts for the education
of artists. Semioticians have also tried to formalize a
language of visual images. Jacques Bertin proposed
a system similar to that of Dondis in which the visual
marks that make up images are structured by one
or a combination of variables of shape, texture,
value, colour, size, and orientation (Bertin, 1967/
1983). His study went beyond artistic and graphic
design images to consider a wide range of visual
compositions that encompassed two-dimensional
visualizations such as maps, diagrams, and charts.
Thus, it must be noted that during their education
M. Jessop
288 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
digital artists are not spending those years learning
how to use the technology, but rather the time is
spent learning how to express oneself and commu-
nicate through digital visual media. They are taking
that time to learn the ‘language’ of creative digital
visualization. Taking a parallel example from the
sciences, how many of us would be able understand
a blackboard covered with notation written in one of
the chosen ‘languages’ of the scientist, advanced
mathematical formulae? Scholars in each area have
spent many years mastering their respective commu-
nication media, using ‘language’ which can only be
understood by others who share the same knowledge
and experience of that medium. Humanists have
similar knowledge and skills for the use of written
language but little in the way of visual literacy, but
still expect to be able to make effective use of images,
in the form of visualizations, to explore and com-
municate ideas with very little (if any) additional
study. That people so frequently succeed in doing
so is commendable but how much more could
they do if they had higher levels of visual literacy?
Our education system equips our students, and our-
selves, with a worryingly low level of visual literacy to
cope with an environment that is increasingly
dependent on visual media. I have observed a low
level of awareness of the meaning of even simple
graphics among my students. There is a strong argu-
ment for increased provision of visual literacy
education alongside any drive to exploit digital
visualization. At the very least this situation demon-
strates the necessity of expanding the multi-
disciplinary teams involved in humanities digital
visualization projects to include professional artists.
Their contribution cannot be dismissed as being
merely ‘aesthetic’ for those aesthetics are deeply
embedded in the effective use of the medium of
digital visualization.
5 A Framework for Scholarly
Standards in Digital Visualization:
The London Charter
If the characteristics and research outcomes of
digital visualization satisfy the roles of the discovery,
exchange, interpretation, and presentation of
knowledge (which I believe it is clear they do),
the problem becomes not one of ‘is visualization
a scholarly activity?’ but ‘how can the integrity of
its scholarship be ensured?’
One of the most visually exciting applications of
digital visualization occurs in the research and com-
munication of cultural heritage. It is an area in
which three-dimensional visualization is being
employed in a wide range of contexts and provides
a useful case study. If the full potential of the meth-
odology is to be realized it is essential that ways are
found to ensure that such work is intellectually and
technically rigorous. In this instance, the need is to
establish standards that are responsive to the partic-
ular properties of 3D visualization; however, many
of these standards would be more widely applicable
to other branches of visualization, and indeed the
application of digital tools to cultural heritage and
the digital humanities in general.
The cultural heritage community has been apply-
ing 3D modelling and Virtual Reality for a number
of years. Many publications have arisen from this
work and an active community of practice has devel-
oped. All recognize the importance of ensuring that
visualization methods are applied with the same
intellectual rigour that guides traditional, and other
digital, scholarship. At the core of any discussion is
the need for visualizations to accurately convey to
users the distinctions between evidence and hypoth-
esis, and between different levels of probability. The
London Charter is a ‘work in progress’ established by
members of the digital cultural heritage community
to tackle these and many other issues. The Charter
‘aims to define the basic objectives and principles of
the use of 3D visualization methods in relation to
intellectual integrity, reliability, transparency, docu-
mentation, standards, sustainability, and access’.22
The field is changing rapidly and encompasses an
expanding range of research aims so the Charter
sets out not to prescribe specific aims or methods
but rather to establish a set of ‘broad principles for
the use, in research and communication of cultural
heritage, of 3D visualization upon which the intel-
lectual integrity of such methods and outcomes
depend’. Its aims are to:
 Provide a benchmark having widespread recog-
nition among stakeholders.
Digital visualization as a scholarly activity
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 289
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 Promote intellectual and technical rigour in such
uses.
 Enable appropriate evaluative criteria and meth-
ods to be determined and applied.
 Stimulate debate on methodological issues.
 Offer a robust foundation upon which specialist
subject communities can build detailed standards
and guides.
 Ensure appropriate access and sustainability
strategies are determined and applied.
 Enable 3D visualization authoritatively to
contribute to the study, interpretation, and man-
agement of cultural heritage assets.
The Charter addresses these objectives through eight
principles:
(1) Subject communities
(2) Aims and methods
(3) Sources
(4) Transparency requirements
(5) Documentation
(6) Standards
(7) Sustainability
(8) Access
All of these are relevant to the maintenance of high
standards of scholarship in any digital humanities
activity, but four are particularly pertinent to this
article: aims and methods; sources; transparency
requirements; and documentation.
5.1 Aims and methods
3D visualization methods are used to achieve a
wide range of research and communication aims
in the cultural heritage sector. The visual impact
and appeal of the methods must not be abused or
allowed to seduce the viewer, rather a 3D visualiza-
tion should only be used to address an aim when
it is the most appropriate and effective available
method for that purpose. This is true of many
visualization methods, right down to the level of
producing a graph with a small data set when in
fact a table would be a better device to use. What
is required is a systematic evaluation of the suitabil-
ity of the method. A great deal of the work in the
digital humanities is innovative so there are often
no precedents on which to base such decisions.
In these cases ‘the choice of method should be
made carefully, based on the best available knowl-
edge and experience, and be reviewed periodically,
resources permitting, as the research process pro-
gresses’.23 One further point is that it is important
that the project documentation records why the
choice of a particular method was made thus
making it easier to defend or review the research
process. This is echoed in the design of projects,
such as TAPoR,24 which include mechanisms to
record process and intermediate results as well as
final outcomes (rather like the paradigm of scientific
research, or indeed the assessment of artists in
training).
5.2 Sources
Scholarly practice stresses the importance of identi-
fying and evaluating sources in a structured way.
This is equally important when ensuring the intel-
lectual integrity of digital visualization methods and
outcomes. The sources must be evaluated as rigor-
ously as they would be for the production of any
secondary or tertiary source. One of the items in this
section of the Charter leads on to the next point
‘Careful consideration should be given to the aims
and contexts for both visualization creation and dis-
semination in order to determine whether, or to
what extent, the sources considered and the ratio-
nale for their interpretation, should be published
with the visualization outcomes.’25
5.3 Transparency requirements
Images are seductive and there is a natural tendency
to instinctively believe whatever one sees with one’s
own eyes but in the case of digital visualizations
what is been seen is entirely a constructed object
and it is essential to also know the evidence upon
which it is based. The Charter observes that ‘Opacity
regarding the relationship of sources to outcomes
makes 3D visualization anomalous among research
methods, and may help to account for the lack of
recognition of 3d visualization as a valid research
process or outcome in certain subject commu-
nities.’26 It should therefore always be possible to
evaluate a visualization independently of the
authority claims of its creators. If this is not possible
its significance as a research method or outcome
remains indeterminable. Therefore, visualization
M. Jessop
290 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
outcomes should be ‘disseminated with sufficient
information to allow the relevant subject commu-
nities to understand and evaluate the choice and
application of the method in relation to its
aims’.27 The Charter suggests that ‘Sufficient infor-
mation should be provided to allow 3D visualiza-
tion methods and outcomes to be understood and
evaluated appropriately in relation to the contexts in
which they are used and disseminated.’28 This is
broken down in to:
 The kind and status of information the visualiza-
tion represents including the nature and degree
of factual uncertainty of a hypothetical
reconstruction.
 It also recognizes that the type and quantity of
transparency information will vary between pro-
jects and at different phases of the same project.
New scholarly apparatus similar to those used
for textual scholarship must be developed and
applied. The medium employed to implement this
apparatus need not be textual, what is important is
that the method of providing the transparency
information should be the most appropriate avail-
able whether it is graphical, textual, video, audio,
numerical, or combinations of these. The varying
levels of experience and knowledge in different
parts of the community mean that the level of
documentation required will vary; in particular,
new and/or unfamiliar methods will require more
explanation. In addition, different levels of ‘assumed
knowledge’ apply within subject communities. This
also implies that transparency information require-
ments may change as levels and sophistication of
understanding of particular visualization methods
rise and that these requirements will also vary
between communities.
5.4 Documentation
The reuse of research outcomes in new contexts,
the enhancement of discovery and access mecha-
nisms, and facilitating interdisciplinarity are at the
core of most humanities computing work. The
Charter deals specifically with 3D visualization but
its recommendations aim to formalize a strategy
that applies to much of the work performed by
digital humanists. The Charter suggests that the
‘process and outcomes of 3D visualization creation
should be sufficiently documented to enable the
creation of accurate transparency records, potential
reuse of the research conducted and its outcomes
in new contexts, enhanced resource discovery and
access, and to promote understanding beyond the
original subject community’.29 The Charter contains
many specific guidelines in this area but the overall
aims are to:
 Ensure the transparency of methods by explicit
statements of what was done and why. This
allows the method to be assessed and facilitates
reuse of the work.
 Ensure the transparency of the use of sources.
 Assist in the dissemination of knowledge derived
from the project.
 To provide some of the scholarly apparatus that
is otherwise missing from non-textual media.
 Open a debate on methodological and theoretical
issues to compensate for the lack of a framework
similar to that that has evolved over many hun-
dreds of years for other research methods. This
is complicated further by the collaborative and
interdisciplinary nature of research in the digital
humanities. Co-workers may lack a common
episteme or set of conventions that generally
characterize subject communities. It is therefore
essential to reflect upon the ‘unspoken assump-
tions and different lexica of the different subject
communities engaged in the common visualiza-
tion process’.30
6 Conclusion
Digital Visualization has potential applications in
all areas of the humanities and can be applied to
explore virtually any form of data. It does not exist
in isolation; rather it is part of a continuum of visual
sources and methodologies the majority of which
are also relatively young and so lack the long his-
tories of debate that have shaped other forms of
scholarship. This is a significant factor impacting
upon its acceptance as a scholarly activity.
In the humanities, it is accepted that texts
and documents are produced as readings resulting
from acts of interpretation between the reader and
Digital visualization as a scholarly activity
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 291
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the text; the images produced by digital visualiza-
tions now need to be regarded in the same way.
Every representation, visual, or otherwise, is an
effort to structure an argument and as such it is a
rhetorical device. Although there may be a case for
striving to define the visual ‘language’ used in this
form of communication, at this stage this is a minor
consideration. Levels of visual literacy are currently
so low that the effort may be better spent elsewhere,
such as raising general understanding of visual
sources. What needs to be understood (and disse-
minated) at this time is the relationship between
what is being communicated and how it is being
communicated through digital visualizations. It is
clear that visualization is a scholarly activity rich
in opportunities to create knowledge. The method-
ology itself and the theoretical issues surrounding it
are still young and lack the long history of debate
that has shaped other scholarly activities. It is there-
fore essential that such a debate is begun and sus-
tained; frameworks such as the London Charter
will be useful in this process. The Charter and the
organizations that are emerging within groups of
researchers will also assist in the important process
of building a community of practice.
Information graphics, and indeed images gener-
ally, are expressions of procedures for generating
knowledge through the act of visualization and
ways of displaying knowledge embodied in visual
imagery (Drucker, 2003). Visualization addresses
epistemological and pedagogical issues that are
common to the digital humanities and are at the
forefront of the developing discipline of humanities
computing. This is a vast topic and the main aim
here has been to argue the validity of digital visual-
ization as a scholarly methodology; demonstrate
that it is part of a continuum of established use of
visual methods and sources in the humanities; and
identify some steps that are required to ensure its
acceptance as having the intellectual rigour required
of a scholarly methodology.
References
Arnheim, R. (1969). Visual Thinking. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Berger, J. (1972). Ways of Seeing. London: BBC and
Penguin.
Bertin, J. (1967/1983). The Semiology of Graphics:
Diagrams, Networks and Maps (Berg, W. J., Trans.).
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Burrows, J. F. (1987). Computation into Criticism.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dondis, D. A. (1973). A Primer of Visual Literacy.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Donovan, E. K. (2007). Sacra Imago: Devotional Art of the
Middle Ages. Krannert Art Museum Exhibition Guide.
Urbana-Champaign, IL: University of Illinois.
Drucker, J. (2003). Graphesis: Visual Knowledge Produc-
tion and Representation. http://www.noraproject.org/
reading.php (accessed 20 October 2007).
Hackett-Fischer, D. (2005). Liberty and Freedom: A
Visual History of America’s Founding Ideas. New York,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hillier, W. and Hanson, J. (1986). The Social Logic of
Space. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ivins, W. M. (1969). Prints and Visual Communication.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jensen, M. (2003). Visualizing Complex Semantic
Timelines. Newsblip Technical Report 2003001,
http://www.newsblip.com/tr/nbtr2003001.pdf (accessed
27 October 2007).
Jensen, M. (2006). Conference Presentation Semantic
Timeline Tools for History and Criticism. Digital
Humanities Conference 2006, CATI, Universite´ Paris,
Paris.
Jessop, M. (2006). Dynamic Maps in Humanities
Computing. Human IT, 8.3, 68–82. http://www.hb.se/
bhs/ith/3-8/mj.pdf (accessed 26 August 2007).
Jessop, M. (2008). The Inhibition of Geographical
Information in Digital Humanities Scholarship.
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23(1): 39–50.
Kandinsky, W. (1979). Point, Line and Plane. New York:
Dover Publications.
Moretti, F. (2005). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models
for a Literary Theory. London: Verso.
Robinson, A. H. (1967). The Thematic Maps of Charles
Joseph Minard. Imago Mundi, 21: 95–108.
Staley, D. (2003). Computers, Visualization and History.
New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Tufte, E. R. (1983). The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information. Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press,
pp. 40–1.
M. Jessop
292 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Tufte, E. R. (2006). Beautiful Evidence. Cheshire,
Connecticut: Graphics Press, pp. 122–39.
Wainer, H (2005). Graphic Discovery: A Trout in the Milk
and other Visual Adventures. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Wood, D. (1992). The Power of Maps. New York: Guilford
Press.
Notes
1 This is commonly believed to be based on a ‘Chinese
proverb’ however Paul Martin Lester believes that it
was in fact made up by the advert writer Frederick R.
Barnard. See http://commfaculty.fullerton.edu/lester/
writings/1000pictures.html (accessed 26 August 2008).
2 Wikipedia at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scholarly_
method (accessed 3 September 2007).
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid.
5 A ‘method’ is taken to be synonymous with a
‘technique’.
6 ‘Methodology’ refers to more than a simple set of
methods; rather it refers to the rationale and the phil-
osophical assumptions that underlie a particular
study.
7 Valley of the Shadow http://valley.vcdh.virginia.edu/
(accessed 10 October 2007).
8 Salem Witch Trials http://etext.virginia.edu/salem/
witchcraft/ (accessed 10 October 2007).
9 Electronic Cultural Atlas Initiative (ECAI) http://
ecai.org/ (accessed 20 September 2007).
10 TimeMap http://www.timemap.net/ (accessed 20
September 2007).
11 The space syntax laboratory at University College
London describes Space syntax as ‘a set of techniques
for the analysis of spatial configurations of all kinds,
especially where spatial configuration seems to be
a significant aspect of human affairs, as it is in build-
ings and cities. Originally conceived by Professor Bill
Hillier and his colleagues at The Bartlett, UCL in the
1980s as a tool to help architects simulate the likely
effects of their designs, it has since grown to become
a tool used around the world in a variety of research
and areas and design applications. It has been
extensively applied in the fields of architecture,
urban design, planning, transportation, and interior
design. Over the past decade, space syntax techniques
have also been used for research in fields as diverse as
archaeology, information technology, urban and
human geography, and anthropology’. See http://
www.spacesyntax.org/introduction/index.asp
(accessed 30 August 2007).
12 Text Analysis Portal for Research (TaPOR) http://
portal.tapor.ca/portal/portal (accessed 10 October
2007).
13 NORA Project http://www.noraproject.org/ (accessed
20 September 2007).
14 A Visualization of Dante’s Inferno. http://www3.iath.
virginia.edu/hell/(accessed 15 October 2007).
15 Text Rain by Camille Utterback http://www.
camilleutterback.com/textrain.html (accessed 11
October 2007).
16 Turning the Pages http://www.bl.uk/onlinegallery/ttp/
ttpbooks.html (accessed 27 october 2007).
17 Theatre of Pompey Project http://www.pompey.cch.
kcl.ac.uk/ (accessed 11 October 2007).
18 The Theatron Project http://www.theatron.org
(accessed 26 August 2008).
19 ICT Methods Network http://www.methodsnetwork.
ac.uk/ (accessed 11 October 2007).
20 The London Charter http://www.londoncharter.org/
(accessed 11 October 2007).
21 3D Visualization in the Arts Network (3DVisA) http://
3dvisa.cch.kcl.ac.uk/index.html (accessed 10 October
2007).
22 The London Charter http://www.londoncharter.org/
(accessed 11 October 2007), p. 1.
23 Ibid., p. 5.
24 The TAPoR URL is http://portal.tapor.ca/portal/portal
(accessed 15 October 2007).
25 The London Charter http://www.londoncharter.org/
(accessed 11 October 2007), p. 6.
26 Ibid., p. 7.
27 Ibid., p. 7.
28 Ibid., p. 7.
29 Ibid., p. 8.
30 The London Charter http://www.londoncharter.org/
(accessed 27 October 2007), p. 8.
Digital visualization as a scholarly activity
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 23, No. 3, 2008 293
 at U
B Leipzig on D
ecem
ber 9, 2011
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
