
1 Introduction
Over the past 20 years, the Text Encoding Initiative
(TEI) has developed comprehensive guidelines for
scholarly text encoding (TEI Consortium, 2007a,b).
In order to expand the user base of TEI, it is impor-
tant that tutorial materials are made available to
scholars new to textual encoding. However, there
is a paucity of stand alone teaching materials avail-
able which support beginner’s level learning of TEI.
Materials which are available are not in formats
which would enable tutorials to be provided in
classroom settings (such as through part of a
University course), or allow individuals to work
through graded examples in their own time: the
common way of learning new computational tech-
niques through self-directed learning. As a result,
there is an urgent need for a suite of TEI tutorials
for the self-directed learner. The TEI by Example
(TBE)2 project is currently developing a range of
freely available online tutorials which will walk indi-
viduals through the different stages in marking up a
document in TEI. To do so, the development envi-
ronment will need to be explained, documented, and
links to freely available software provided to allow
users to undertake TEI based markup themselves. In
addition to this, the tutorials will provide annotated
examples of a range of texts, indicating the editorial
choices necessary when marking up a text in TEI.
Linking to real examples from projects which utilize
the TEI will reaffirm the advice given to learners.
In this article, we discuss the current methods of
teaching TEI, and why these do not cater for the
lone scholar or self directed learner interested in
Correspondence:
Melissa Terras, Department
of Information Studies,
Henry Morley Building,
University College London,
Gower Street, London
WC1E 6BT, UK.
Email:
m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
297
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp018 Advance Access Published on 12 May 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
learning TEI in their own environment and in their
own time. We discuss the need for specifically
designed online tutorials in the TEI, and why it is
important to incorporate example material of TEI
code in these tutorials. Finally, an overview of the
TBE project is given, discussing its aims, structure,
deliverables, and future work.
2 Teaching the TEI
The TEI, an international organization founded in
1987 to develop guidelines for encoding machine-
readable texts in the humanities and social sciences,
has produced a variety of guidelines for the encod-
ing of scholarly texts. The rigorous intellectual
endeavour to create the guidelines ensures that
‘[t]he TEI is a very extensive encoding language
and is intended to support very complex encoding
of very complex documents’ (TEI Consortium,
2007a,b). As a result, the TEI has the potential to
be used in a variety of situations. Markup projects
often train their workforce in the principles and
theory of markup, with encoders learning on the
job. Students in Literature and Language and
other Humanities based subjects may have a need
for TEI. Students in Library, Archives, and
Electronic Communication and Publishing, and
Librarians and Archivists, may benefit from under-
standing how best to encode, document, and ulti-
mately preserve electronic textual data (and the
widespread inclusion of information professionals
in the TEI community would further the aims of
the initiative, by encouraging the uptake of TEI as
an aid to preserve electronic textual data).
Academics wishing to join the ‘digital revolution’
may have an introduction to the field of Digital
Humanities through the discipline of textual
markup. Fundamentally, many of these individuals
who come across the TEI may go on to teach or
inform others, and as a result, if we wish to
expand the user community and the use of TEI, it
is important to provide training, and teaching mate-
rials, which foster and build confidence, and
demonstrate the use and usefulness of the TEI
guidelines. However, individuals wishing to learn
the TEI are currently faced with the lengthy and
technically descriptive guidelines, which are hardly
written with the absolute beginner in mind. An
alternative is to attend a taught course regarding
the TEI, or to consult the materials made available
on the TEI website.
University courses sometimes integrate TEI into
their teaching (for example, the ‘Humanities
Computing: Electronic Text’3 undergraduate
course at the University of Antwerp, or the
‘Digital Resources in the Humanities’4 Masters
level module, in the Department of Information
Studies, University College London) although this
is rare, and access is limited to a few interested
students. More commonly, short courses are some-
times sponsored and provided by the TEI, or related
organizations: for example the workshops organized
by the Centre for Scholarly Editing and Document
Studies,5 and those ran by the Brown Women
Writers Project ‘offer[s] periodic hands-on work-
shops on text encoding and the TEI Guidelines.
These range from 1 to 5 days and cover a range of
topics in basic and intermediate TEI encoding, TEI
customization, basic XSLT, and issues in text encod-
ing theory’ (WWP, 2007), for instance at the yearly
Digital Humanities Summer Institute.6 An archive
of a range of documentation from workshops,
including presentations, exercises, and handout
materials, is maintained on the TEI website7.
However, short term courses have their own peda-
gogical problems: they are rarely assessed, so it is
difficult to know if the students have really learnt
anything useful that will be retained. When the
intensity of the course ends, students may go back
to their old habits. When motivational tutors are no
longer around to ask when things go wrong, it may
be the case that students give up their attempt to
learn the TEI. There is little room for a ‘holistic’
approach to teaching (Bernold et al., 2000) where
what is learnt can be reinforced over a period of
time through a variety of pedagogical methods
such as evaluation, feedback, discussion, experimen-
tation, and teamwork.
Although the materials emanating from the TEI
workshops are available online, until recently the
design of the TEI website dissuaded many potential
new users from learning TEI. The old website com-
prised of a multitude of broken or misleading links,
M. Terras et al.
298 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
maze like structures, and dated tutorials (in early
2007, the latest introductory material available on
the site presented outdated and therefore erroneous
material to novices: Sperberg-McQueen and
Burnard (2002b,c). The new website design,
launched in October 2007, presents a cleaner and
more modern face to the TEI. An up to date generic
tutorial, which also features in the TEI guidelines
itself, is now available on the TEI website (TEI
Constortium, 2007b). However, this tutorial, and
links to workshop materials, are still buried deep
within misleadingly titled menu items, and unlikely
to be found instantly by potential new users.
Although there has been much time devoted to
teaching TEI, and the preparation of teaching mate-
rials for lectures and workshops, the online presence
of the TEI suggests that reaching out to new users is
not high on the TEI’s agenda. This may not be the
intention, but the design and focus of the website is
not welcoming to those new to the concept of tex-
tual markup, or from outside the existing TEI
community.
Additionally, there is the problem that the retro-
spective posting of workshop materials on a website
is not the same, for users, as actually attending a
workshop. The nuances of bullet points on
PowerPoint slides are lost when the presenter is
not there to explain their meaning. There is no
room for feedback, or for any communication of
any sort with the course leader. Exercises which
may have been clear in the classroom, when a com-
puting environment was provided, may be impos-
sible for those attempting them alone, on a different
system. As a result most of the workshop materials
posted online are intimidating rather than illumi-
nating, and serve more to act as an archive for the
TEI for teaching activities than to provide learning
materials for those wishing to learn TEI unaided.
Although it makes sense to offer online materials
for distance learners, these have to be tailored to
the needs of online users.
Online materials need to take a different form
from face-to-face teaching materials, as the online
experience is different to that presented in the tradi-
tional classroom because: learners are different; the
communication is via computer and World Wide
Web; the social dynamic of the learning
environment is changed; feedback mechanisms
function differently; there is the potential to reach
a much wider audience; and there is the potential
for re-use in other learning environments. As a
result, instructors wishing to provide such materials
online should ‘master design and delivery strategies,
techniques, and methods for teaching online
courses’ (Yang and Cornelius, 2005).
If the digital humanities community wants to pro-
mote the TEI markup framework as a serious tool for
digital humanities, humanities computing, digital
culture, or humanities informatics, to name just a
few of the labels this archipelago of disciplines gets
(McCarty, 2006), and to expand the use of the TEI
guidelines beyond the reaches of the TEI community
as it stands, then there is an urgent need for an online
TEI course which is less generic than the introduc-
tion published within the TEI guidelines and more
user friendly, comprehensive, and interactive than
the online workshop materials which are currently
presented as stand alone teaching materials.
The demand for such introductory material can
be illustrated by the popularity of a paper published
in a special edition of LLC: ‘An Introduction to the
TEI and the TEI Consortium’ (Vanhoutte, 2004).
This was reviewed by Matthew Driscoll, thus:
This is followed by a short introduction by
Edward Vanhoutte to the Text Encoding
Initiative (TEI) in general. There are many
such introductions to the TEI available both
in print and on the web and this one is fine so
far as it goes, but one may wonder about its
appropriateness here, given that few readers of
LLC are likely to be so unfamiliar with the TEI
as to require such an introduction. (Driscoll,
2005, p. 337)
However, this introductory article to TEI was con-
sistently amongst the top ten articles requested
online from LLC in the three years following
publication.
3 The Need for TEI by Example
The TBE project was conceived after a difficult
teaching session (it should be noted that, in many
Teaching TEI: The Need for TEI by Example
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 299
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cases at University level, those teaching a course
may not be subject experts in all aspects of a field,
and rely on appropriate resources and teaching
materials to assist them in the areas they are
weaker in. This is a fact of University teaching life,
where academics are asked to teach broadly across a
discipline whilst tending to focus on one aspect of
the discipline as a research topic). In this case, TEI
was being taught by a lecturer who has used TEI in
the past, but not on a day-to-day basis. An intelli-
gent and articulate Masters level student asked
whether ‘TEI was a theoretical exercise on the prin-
ciples and theory of textual markup’ as, although
many projects purported to be using the TEI,
there are very few examples of source code which
are available for those learning the TEI to consult.
Most projects marking texts up in TEI deliver
their texts via the Internet: which means their
code is transformed, via XSLT, into HTML or
XHTML. Interested users can generally only see
this transformed version, and so cannot inspect
and learn from the underlying TEI code.8 At time
of writing, the TEI wiki page which hosts sample
texts from those utilizing the TEI framework fea-
tures only eight projects willing to make some of
their marked up texts available to the general
public.9 The Oxford Text Archive (OTA),10 which
collects, catalogues, and preserves electronic text for
use by the research community, has a few TEI
marked up texts (of any useful granularity, exclud-
ing those with just a TEI Header which is added to
all texts by the OTA themselves) available, but it is
impossible to find these through searching the web-
site, and these texts are only available by contacting
the OTA and requesting TEI marked up texts
(Cummings, 2007). This is a loss to users, who
would benefit from seeing both good and bad exam-
ples of markup, to learn to encode by example. It is
understood that much intellectual and temporal
effort goes into marking up textual material with
suitable granularity to facilitate in depth analysis
and manipulation of textual material, and that proj-
ects may not wish to make this investment public.
However, being able to view the markup approaches
of established scholars and projects in the field is an
essential tool for TEI teaching which is currently not
utilized.
Learning a computing language (especially
through self-directed learning) is usually accom-
plished through examining and working through
examples. Learning by example is effectively an
implementation of problem based learning, an effi-
cient and useful approach to teaching skills to indi-
viduals in order for them to undertake similar tasks
themselves, successfully. The literature on this is
wide and varied.11 The paucity of TEI examples
currently available to learners can be contrasted
with the teaching literature for computing: at time
of writing, there were 837 titles available on
Amazon.co.uk with the words ‘by example’ in the
title: most were featured in the Computers and
Internet section. 756 computing books had ‘case
studies’ in the title. There has been particular con-
sideration as to the effectiveness of example and
problem based learning when learning computer
programming (for example, see Mayer, 1981, 1988;
Kelleher and Pausch, 2005). Even the fictional
LOLcode programming language, constructed as a
joke after the popularity of the internet meme
LOLcats, where instant messaging English is used
to caption cute pictures of cats, has a variety of
examples of code available which users can scruti-
nize to learn LOLcode for themselves.12 If learning
by example is such a fundamental approach to
learning a computing language, where is TBE?
Additionally, the development of any online
teaching course would need to understand how to
develop online materials successfully, and how this
may differ from more traditional teaching and
learning environments (Stephenson, 2001; Jochems
et al., 2003). Understanding the nature of online
tutorials, and grappling with the pedagogical issues
these technologies offer, is a core issue when begin-
ning to consider the construction of a TBE online
course.
The need for introductory training materials
regarding text encoding within the TEI framework,
and the present lack of appropriate teaching
resources, spurred us to create TBE ourselves. We
aim to produce an online TEI course by example
which will introduce novice users to text encoding
within the TEI framework, and serve as an intro-
ductory teaching package for instructors in the
classroom, while presenting the user with real,
M. Terras et al.
300 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
annotated examples from encoding projects.
Additionally, we will need to make a software toolkit
available for teaching text encoding, to support
interested trainers and learners. Investigating the
affordances of online teaching tools (such as quizzes
and interactive feedback) will also aid in the crea-
tion of useful learning materials for those who wish
to undertake textual markup using the TEI
guidelines.
4 TEI by Example Development
The TBE project is currently developing a range of
freely available online tutorials walking individuals
through the different stages in marking up a docu-
ment in TEI. Project partners are The Centre for
Scholarly Editing and Document Studies (CTB)13
of the Royal Academy of Dutch Language and
Literature, the Centre for Computing in the
Humanities (CCH)14 of King’s College London,
and the Department of Information Studies15 of
University College London, with an international
advisory board consisting of experts in textual
encoding and markup (http://www.kantl.be/ctb/
project/2006/tei-ex.htm#t4). The development
team consists of the project leaders, Melissa Terras
and Edward Vanhoutte, and the executive project
officer, Ron Van den Branden. The deliverables
will be published and hosted by CCH (King’s
College London) under endorsement by the
Association of Literary and Linguistic Computing
(ALLC).16 A small amount of funding has been pro-
cured from the CCH, the ALLC, and the CTB which
allows for a few days of development time to con-
struct the tutorials.
A major point of attention at the start of the
project was the status of the TEI model. Since
early 2002, the TEI Consortium has been engaged
in a major (backward incompatible) revision of the
TEI specification, migrating it from version P4
(Sperberg-McQueen and Burnard, 2002a) to P5
(TEI Consortium, 2007a,b). Featuring more than
just changes in the markup model and the content
of the guidelines, P5 entails an overhaul of the com-
plete production process of the standard. Apart
from the innovations regarding the content of the
TEI markup scheme, adoption of P5 involves coping
with peripheral technical innovations. The TEI Pizza
Chef software for deriving P4 TEI DTDs has been
superseded by the Roma system, allowing users to
derive TEI customizations in a number of formal
expressions, from the (innate) Relax NG
Scheme to DTDs or W3C XML Schemas. By devel-
oping P5 as a sourceforge project,17 early adopters
could prepare for adoption of this revision via
public access to the latest source code, and more
or less stable intermediate snapshot code releases.
Of course, the inherent instability of a long
(public) transition period mortgages any teaching
material covering its changing subject matter. It
seems that the timing of the TBE project coincides
with a turning point in the transition of TEI P4 to
P5: the advantages of P5 adoption for this project
seemed to outweigh the disadvantages of P4. When
undertaking the preliminary investigations into
instigating the project, the most recent snapshot
suggested that stability would soon be at hand
(Van den Branden, 2006). As a result, the project
began developing materials in P5. Indeed, in 2007,
the P5 Guidelines were released (TEI Consortium,
2007a,b), indicating that this was a prudent choice
taken at the outset of the project.
The deliverables of the project are: online ‘TEI by
example’ tutorials, a printable PDF version of the
‘TEI by example’ tutorials, an online software
toolkit for text encoding, a downloadable CD-
ROM image for burning off-line toolkits for use
by course participants, and adequate documenta-
tion to enable the tutorials to be used elsewhere if
needed. Development of the tutorials began in
October 2006 and has continued throughout 2007
and into 2008 and 2009. It is conceded that devel-
opment time has been slow: however, this is due to
the fact that the project is being undertaken with
very little funding, and on top of full time academic
and research projects by the development team. At
present, the technical infrastructure of the project
has been agreed and implemented. Work on the
individual tutorials has begun, with an aim for a
full project launch in summer 2009 (Fig. 1).
Eight tutorials are under construction. The first,
an introduction to text encoding and the TEI,
encourages the user to explore textual encoding
Teaching TEI: The Need for TEI by Example
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 301
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and markup to foster an understanding of why this
is useful, or even necessary, to allow texts to be
processed automatically and used and understood
by others. The TEI header tutorial covers the type
of information and metadata captured in the header
element. Three tutorials focus on examples of indi-
vidual types of text: Prose, Poetry, and Drama and a
further two tutorials deal with examples of
Manuscript Transcription and Scholarly Editing.
The final tutorial will investigate how the TEI can
be customized, and the use of ODD and Roma.
The TBE tutorials aim to provide examples of
markup for users of all levels. Examples will be pro-
vided of different document types, with varying
degrees in the granularity of markup, to provide a
useful teaching and reference aid for those involved
in the marking up of texts. Likewise, the availability
of a software toolkit for teaching text encoding will
support the potential trainers to take up the chal-
lenge to teach TEI on several occasions.
The first tutorial to be fully developed was the
Poetry module. This was chosen as it was a relatively
self-contained module, and it could be used to test
the various options available for development.
There were many editorial, technological, and ped-
agogical choices the authors had to make. The team
had to understand the technical possibilities and
limitations afforded by the online environment,
and decide how best to integrate these into the
tutorial materials. By juxtaposing static (pages,
articles) and dynamic (quizzes, validation) func-
tionality, the project aims to provide a holistic
learning environment for those new to the TEI.
Further linking to other markup examples, provided
by the community and the project, extends the
remits of the project into another, alternative view-
point by which to start learning the TEI, aside from
the TEI guidelines themselves. Additionally, the role
of user testing will be explored to feature feedback
and comments from the TEI user community, to aid
in the development of intuitive tutorial materials.
The completed poetry module has been circulated
to the project board, and potential users, for com-
ment, and user requirements will inform the design
and implementation of the remaining modules over
the coming months (Fig. 2).
It has always been the TBE project’s aim to inte-
grate real examples from the TEI community within
the modules. In December 2006, a call for examples
was sent out to the TEI community via the TEI-L
email discussion list (http://listserv.brown.edu/
archives/cgi-bin/wa?A0¼TEI-L). Specific projects
that were also known to be using TEI to markup
interesting and complex texts were also contacted to
ascertain whether they would be able to provide
examples of specific encoding approaches and to
contextualize encoding theory with real world
examples. However, the response from the commu-
nity so far has been disappointing. It is understood
that there is much intellectual effort placed into
Fig. 1 The current TBE home page, providing the user with an overview of the structure and contents of tutorials,
exercises, and quizzes
M. Terras et al.
302 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
marking up a text, and that the creators of markup
up texts may not want to make their TEI based
markup available. TEI is often used as a production
standard, and as a result, users can be hesitant in
letting others glimpse into the internal workings of a
system or project. It is also clear that there is some
concern that markup approaches would be criti-
cized, and projects are not keen to ‘air their dirty
laundry in public’: even though showing users real
life examples of markup can be more instructive
than perfect specimen cases. Additionally, learning
good techniques from the observation of bad tech-
niques is a well used pedagogical approach which
has some benefit: ‘An understanding of practical
rhetoric as conduct . . . provides what a teacher
cannot: a locus for questioning, for criticism, for
distinguishing good practice from bad’ (Miller,
1989, p. 23). It would be useful for projects to be
able to provide examples where they do not feel the
markup was well executed, and comment why this is
the case. However, it is understood that individuals
and projects do not wish to be open to criticism.
It may also be that projects and individuals do
not wish to contribute to the development of a
resource which is operating outside the safe
bounds of the established, limited TEI community:
as yet, the TBE project has no official relationship
with the TEI Consortium itself (until the tutorial
development has been undertaken it was felt that
it was better to keep the team small and focused,
although this may be revised in future. Certain
established members in the TEI community have
been critical of the efforts of TBE, perhaps because
they do not like the implied criticism that their
approaches and their teaching methods are not
reaching a wide audience). Additionally, due to
the paucity of examples from the community avail-
able, the TBE tutorials have been written with exam-
ples which were created by the project itself, which
has come under some criticism (although this has
the added benefit of allowing all learners to start
from the same carefully chosen point). Finally, pro-
viding TBE with marked up XML files is not enough
for examples to be of use: it is important that the
examples are accompanied with a brief introductory
commentary to the editorial approaches used within
each document markup, so contribution to TBE
requires investment of time and effort for a project,
Fig. 2 The Poetry validation exercise. The user is presented with a poem and given a set of tasks to carry out. The online
validator checks whether they have carried out those tasks correctly
Teaching TEI: The Need for TEI by Example
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 303
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
which is an additional task for already hard pressed
people to add to their to-do lists. The TBE project
continues to attempt to outreach to individuals and
projects within the community and to encourage
them to submit examples for use in the tutorials.
Until this happens, a selection of texts are being
marked up by the project itself, for use in the tutori-
als, providing textbook examples of markup
approaches. It is acknowledged that this is second
best to building up a library of real-life examples of
markup.
A poster presented at Digital Humanities 2007
(Van den Branden et al., 2007) encouraged feedback
regarding the implementation and design of the
tutorials from the Digital Humanities community.
A poster presented at Digital Humanities 2008 (Van
den Branden et al., 2008) encouraged user testing
from the Digital Humanities community which
allows us to integrate feedback into the design pro-
cess, before launching the tutorials online.
5 Future Work
The response of the TEI community to TBE has
been muted: although many examples of TEI
markup have been promised, few have been pro-
vided to the project. Any projects working on
texts that they think may be of interest to a learner,
or those who would like their texts to be considered,
should get in touch with the TBE project:
teibyexample@kantl.be.
In order to support multilingualism in the text
encoding community, the online tutorials are being
considered for translation into a number of lan-
guages from their English originals. The translations
proper, however, are outside the scope of the initial
stages of the project, but the problems presented by
internationalization are important and pressing
ones. Issues such as how to provide relevant exam-
ples of various text types in different languages must
be addressed, as is how to reach as wide an audience
as possible through the translation of the tutorial
teaching materials into various languages.
Further user testing needs to be undertaken once
the next phase of development of the projects
begins. Students from both University College
London and the University of Antwerp will be
used to give feedback on the TBE materials.
Additionally, at some stage the tutorials will be
open to feedback from the TEI community itself:
we brace ourselves for the reaction.
6 Conclusion
TEI by Example is a modest, but important project
which aims to produce stand alone tutorials in the
of use the TEI guidelines for document markup,
which should be of use to the Digital Humanities
audience, and beyond. It is hoped that the project
results will be relevant to the trainers of TEI, the
students of TEI, the text encoding community,
and the humanities computing community in gen-
eral. To do this, it is important to involve the TEI
community both in the design and testing of the
tutorials, but also in the provision of real world
examples of markup materials, which can be used
as an alternative inroad for interested individuals
wishing to learn and understand the aims of the
TEI. By making use of the possibilities afforded by
the online teaching environment, and creating and
tailoring TEI based teaching materials which can be
used by both individuals and in classroom training
sessions, the TBE project aims to expand the user
community of TEI by providing teaching materials
which cater completely towards learners, rather than
materials provided for the small community of TEI
experts who have little requirement for introductory
materials.
References
Bernold, L. E., Bingham, W. L., McDonald, P. H., and
Attia, T. M. (2000). Impact of holistic and learning-
oriented teaching on academic success. Journal of
Engineering Education, 89(2): 191–9.
Cummings, J. (2007). Quick question regarding OTA and
TEI. Personal Email Communication to M. Terras,
23rd October 2007.
Driscoll, M. J. (2005). Review: Mats Dahlstro¨m, Espen S.
Ore, and Edward Vanhoutte. In Hansen, A. M. (ed.),
The Book as Artefact. Text and Border. Variants – The
M. Terras et al.
304 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Journal of the European Society for Textual Scholarship,
4: 337–340.
Garrison, D. R. (1997). Self directed learning, towards a
comprehensive model. Adult Education Quarterly,
48(1): 18–33.
Jochems, W., van Merrienboer, J., and Koper, R. (eds)
(2003). Integrated E-Learning: Implications for
Pedagogy, Technology and Organization (Open and
Flexible Learning). London: Routledge Farmer.
Kelleher, C. and Pausch, R. (2005). Lowering the barriers
to programming: a taxonomy of programming envir-
onments and languages for novice programmers. ACM
Computing Surveys, 37(2): 83–137.
Mayer, R. (1981). The psychology of how novices learn
computer programming. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 13(1): 121–41.
Mayer, R. (1988). Teaching and Learning Computer
Programming: Multiple Research Perspectives. USA:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
McCarty, W. (2006). Tree, turf, centre, archipelago – or
wild acre? Metaphors and stories for humanities
computing. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 21(1):
1–13.
Miller, C. R. (1989). What’ practical about technical writ-
ing. In Fearing, B. E. and Keats Sparrow, W. (eds),
Technical Writing: Theory and Practice. New York:
Modern Language Association, pp. 14–24.
Norman, G. R. and Schmidt, H. G. (1992). The
psychological basis of problem-based learning: a
review of the evidence. Academic Medicine, 67(9):
557–65.
Savin-Baden, M. and Wilkie, K. (2006). Problem Based
Learning Online. Maidenhead: Open University Press,
McGraw Hill Education.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, L. (eds)
(2002a). TEI P4: Guidelines for Electronic Text
Encoding and Interchange. XML-compatible edition.
XML conversion by Syd Bauman, Lou Burnard,
Steven DeRose, and Sebastian Rahtz Oxford,
Providence, Charlottesville, Bergen: Text Encoding
Initiative Consortium. See http://www.tei-c.org/
release/doc/tei-p4-doc/html/(accessed 10 March 2009).
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, L. (2002b). A
gentle introduction to XML. In Sperberg-McQueen, C.
M. and Burnard, L. (eds) TEI P4: Guidelines for
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange (XML-compa-
tible edition). Oxford, Providence, Charlottesville,
Bergen: Text Encoding Initiative Consortium. http://
www.tei-c.org/P4X/SG.html (accessed 10 March 2009).
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, L. (2002c). TEI
Lite: An introduction to Text Encoding for Interchange.
http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/teiu5_en.html (accessed 10
March 2009).
Stephenson, J. (2001). Teaching and Learning Online:
New Pedagogies for New Technologies. London:
Routledge.
TEI Consortium (eds) (2007a). TEI P5: Guidelines for
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Text
Encoding Initiative Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/
Guidelines/P5/(accessed 10 March 2009).
TEI Consortium (eds.) (2007b). A Gentle Introduction to
XML. In TEI Consortium (eds), TEI P5: Guidelines for
Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange. Text
Encoding Initiative Consortium. http://www.tei-c.org/
release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/SG.html (accessed 10
March 2009).
Van den Branden, R. (2006). [TBE-R001] – TEI by exam-
ple, initial report, 2006/06/09. http://www.kantl.be/ctb/
project/2006/TBE-R001.htm (accessed 10 March 2009).
Van den Branden, R., Vanhoutte, E., and Terras, M.
(2007). TEI by Example. Poster. Digital Humanities
2007, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
USA, June 2007. In Schmidt, S., Siemens, R.,
Kumar, A., and Unsworth, J. (eds), Digital
Humanities 2007. Conference Abstracts. Illinois:
Graduate School of Library and Information Science,
pp. 228–229 <http://www.digitalhumanities.org/
dh2007/abstracts/xhtml.xq?id=221> <http://
www.kantl.be/ctb/pub/2007/teibyexample.jpg>
(accessed 10 March 2009).
Van den Branden, R., Vanhoutte, E., and Terras, M.
(2008). TEI by Example: Pedagogical Approaches
Used in the Construction of Online Digital
Humanities Tutorials. Poster. Digital Humanities
2008. Oulu (Finland), University of Oulu, 26 Juni,
2008. In Opas-Ha¨nnien, L. L., Jokelainen, M.,
Juuso, I., and Seppa¨nen, T. (eds), Digital Humanities
2008. Book of Abstracts. Oulu: University of Oulu,
pp. 282–3 http://www.kantl.be/ctb/pub/2008/teibyex-
ample2.jpg (accessed 10 March 2009).
Vanhoutte, E. (2004). An Introduction to the TEI and the
TEI Consortium. Literary and Linguistic Computing,
19(1): 9–16.
WWP (Women Writers Project). (2007). Workshops on
Text Encoding with TEI. http://www.wwp.brown.edu/
encoding/workshops/(accessed 10 March 2009).
Yang, Y. and Cornelius, L. F. (2005). Preparing
Instructors for Quality Online Instruction. Online
Teaching TEI: The Need for TEI by Example
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 305
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, VIII(I),
Spring 2005. http://www.westga.edu/distance/ojdla/
spring81/yang81.htm (accessed 10 March 2009).
Notes
1 Text Encoding Initiative. http://www.tei-c.org/
(accessed 30 April 2009).
2 TEI by Example. http://www.teibyexample.org
(accessed 30 April 2009).
3 Humanities Computing Electronic Text. http://
www.edwardvanhoutte.org/HC/ (accessed 30 April
2009).
4 Digital Resources in the Humanities. http://www.
ucl.ac.uk/infostudies/teaching/modules/instg008/
(accessed 30 April 2009).
5 Centre for Scholarly Editing and Document Studies.
http://www.kantl.be/ctb/META/ (accessed 30 April
2009).
6 Digital Humanities Summer Institute. http://www.
dhsi.org (accessed 30 April 2009).
7 TEI. http://www.tei-c.org/Support/Learn/tutorials.
xml#body.1_div.3 (accessed 30 April 2009).
8 A notable example is the Digital Library of Dutch
Literature <http://www.dbnl.org> (accessed 30 April
2009).
9 TEI wiki. http://www.tei-c.org/wiki/index.php/
Samples_of_TEI_texts (accessed 30 April 2009).
10 Oxford Text Archive. http://ota.ahds.ac.uk/ (accessed
30 April 2009).
11 For seminal literature regarding the effectiveness of
problem based learning as a pedagogic approach see
Norman and Schmidt (1992), Garrison (1997), and
Savin-Baden and Wilkie (2006).
12 LOLcode Programming language. http://lolcode.com/
(accessed 30 April 2009).
13 The Centre for Scholarly Editing and Document
Studies (CTB). http://www.kantl.be/ctb/ (accessed 30
April 2009).
14 Centre for Computing in the Humanities. http://
www.kcl.ac.uk/schools/humanities/cch/ (accessed 30
April 2009).
15 Department of Information Studies. http://www.info
studies.ucl.ac.uk/ (accessed 30 April 2009).
16 Association of Literary and Linguistic Computing.
http://www.allc.org/ (accessed 30 April 2009).
17 W3C XML Schemas. http://sourceforge.net/projects/
tei/ (accessed 30 April 2009).
M. Terras et al.
306 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
