TEI in a crystal ball1
............................................................................................................................................................
Fotis Jannidis
Institut fu¨r Deutsche Philologie, Universita¨t Wu¨rzburg, Wu¨rzburg,
Germany
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) is an organization, a research community, and a
markup language. Looking back into the history of these three TEIs, this article
tries to describe what has been achieved and what its future challenges will be.
The historical analysis is based on a closer look at the development of the TEI-L
and topics covered by the Guidelines. A final section outlines possible roles of the
TEI as an infrastructure for digital libraries and disciplinary virtual environments.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
The title of my talk was inspired by a remark by
David Birnbaum 17 years ago on the TEI-L discus-
sion list: ‘I have no crystal ball, but 16-bit coding
looks very much like the future for multilingual
texts’.2 Even without a crystal ball he was right
and I cannot even hope to foresee into the future
as well as he did. Looking into a crystal ball to see
the future is much easier if you know your custo-
mer. Doing this for an institution is much more
difficult and requires research into the past: how
was the TEI conceived when it was first developed
and what it has become over the past 20 years? What
is missing from the Guidelines and what is super-
fluous? Are there large trends in the digital world
sweeping TEI along with it; are there smaller trends
in humanities computing? Or are there specific sub-
jects that will assert the most influence on the TEI in
future? Talking about TEI in the future implies that
we know what TEI is. Our answers to the aforemen-
tioned questions will be different for different
aspects of TEI. Very obviously the three letters
stand for a growing collection of tags, or rather
the concepts behind these tags. As Elly Mylonas
and Allen Renear pointed out at the last birthday
celebration at Brown University, the TEI has also
become the synonym for a research community in
the digital humanities (Mylonas and Renear, 1999).
Last but not least, the TEI is the name of an inter-
national consortium with subscribers all over the
world—one of the very few humanities organiza-
tions that successfully operates at that scale. In this
article, I will examine the development of the TEI
from these perspectives and attempt to extrapolate
some future trends.
1 The Text Encoding Initiative
(TEI) as an Organization
The TEI began as a project financed by granting
agencies.3 After the grants that made the initial
stage of TEI development possible were exhausted,
those involved created the Consortium. Financed by
its members, the legal, financial, and technical fra-
mework of the Consortium affords an important
element guaranteeing the sustainability of the
TEI.4 As with other ‘standards’ in the Internet age,
these have to be developed to accommodate new
factors in their environment, new user wishes, and
new technical possibilities. They have to be pro-
moted to the ever increasing number of people
working on the web and the digital world in general;
and they have to be supported to close the gap
between the technical definition, which is general,
terse, and often difficult to access, and the user who
wants to solve a special problem and to avoid a steep
learning curve. In this context, standards are not
everlasting but allow temporal stability and a
Correspondence:
Fotis Jannidis, Institut fu¨r
Deutsche Philologie,
Universita¨t Wu¨rzburg, Am
Hubland, D-97074
Wu¨rzburg, Germany.
E-mail:
fotis.jannidis@uni-
wuerzburg.de
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
253
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp015 Advance Access Published on 14 May 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
controlled transition from one point to the next. For
all these tasks, there is the need for an institution to
fulfil them, and the TEI Consortium looks like a
good solution to do so. For the humanities, this is
a new situation and the creation of a consortium an
innovative solution, at least from the German per-
spective. In the USA and the UK, there seems to be a
greater familiarity with this kind of solution, jud-
ging from the chart (Fig. 1) that shows where the
countries’ TEI members come from.
Today the TEI has eighty-four institutional
members from eighteen different countries on four
continents (Fig. 1).5 This is impressive but the dis-
tribution of the institutional members doesn’t
represent—to my knowledge—the adoption of TEI
in these countries.
The fact that more than a half of all institutional
TEI members (61%) are from the USA, Canada, and
the UK certainly reflects differences in the way and
degree humanities computing is integrated into tra-
ditional humanities; in the way libraries in the dif-
ferent countries picture their role in the digital age;
and differences in the speed some libraries in some
countries understand their new role. Most libraries
and archives don’t have the tradition of taking an
active part in developing standards. Moreover,
during periods when they have to cancel subscrip-
tions and buy fewer books, they shy away from
spending substantial amounts of money for some-
thing that doesn’t look like their core activity.
As short-sighted this may be, a change of attitude
will take time and it will involve a new definition
not only of the role of libraries and archives but also
for the development of new research institutions for
digital humanities. It also means that scholars have
to include activities like the development of huma-
nities related IT standards into their job descrip-
tions and reflect this fact in their decisions on
tenure track positions. Probably it is even more
important to communicate these new institutional
needs to those agencies that usually provide scholars
with funding. In Germany, funding agencies tend to
limit themselves to supporting primary research and
we have to come up with new ways to finance the
infrastructure for the digital humanities, an infra-
structure that encompasses services, tools, data,
support, and standards like the TEI.
This is a learning process for all involved, for the
libraries and archives, the funding agencies, the uni-
versities, and the scholarly communities, and it may
take some time before a chart like the one above
looks a bit more like a birthday cake.
Nevertheless it may be useful—in addition to the
existing structure—to describe clearly defined
research goals in the context of the TEI and to try
to obtain funding for them. As this is only a tem-
porary commitment, in many countries it probably
will be easier to obtain this funding and it will ease
the financial burden of the Consortium that have to
maintain, adopt, promote, and support one of the
first international standards in the humanities.
2 TEI—A Research Community
It has been pointed out repeatedly that TEI is not
only a technical success story but also a social one,
and that the technical success is closely related to the
social network. We all know this social network
exists but how can it be demonstrated? A very
Fig. 1 International distribution of TEI members
F. Jannidis
254 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
crude way is to have a look at the discussion lists,
TEI-L and the now defunct TEI-Tech.6
Figure 2 represents the numbers of postings on
the TEI-L list between 1990 and 2007, in total
10,928. We see that around the release of P3, there
was a peak of activity but afterwards it stayed at a
comparatively high level and started to increase
steeply after 2000. But this is just the activity, not
the people. Exactly who contributes to the lists?
The numbers in these figures are just rough
approximations. Some very unsophisticated perl
scripts collected the data and I did not post-process
them in any way—so Lou’s laptop is a rather active
member of the list next to Lou Burnard himself. The
number of people present in the community rose
around the release of P3 (Fig. 3). Actually it seems
that the release of P3 triggered significant activity
and attracted new people but then the numbers
decreased; you could say, normalized, until 2001
when a new rise began. But the number of active
posters is not nearly rising as rapidly as the number
of postings. This means that people already involved
in the TEI are writing more about it. This could be
understood as a sign that TEI is becoming a full-
time job for more people. But upon closer
inspection, another reading is possible: some
people are investing more and more time into help-
ing others, talking about, and discussing TEI.7
If my figures are accurate, more postings are
written by fewer people (Lou’s laptop included).
Figure 4 shows how many of the postings are cre-
ated by the 10% of most active posters.8 Between
1998 and 2003, there has been a steady rise in the
amount of emails of the most active members of the
TEI-L community. So the chart clearly suggests that
the burden on them is growing instead of being
reduced as more people become involved in the TEI.
But what does this mean? Let us assume for a
minute that the TEI is being used more widely
and more people have started adopting it. If this is
true, then we can safely say there seems to be a
problem integrating all these users into the TEI
research community (if we accept activity on the
TEI-L discussion list as an indicator).
But possibly calling the TEI a research commu-
nity is a misnomer. If you look at the postings, you
will see many of them relate to issues that are not
really about what we would call ‘research’. Most of
the time practical questions are discussed, questions
like how to use a specific element, attribute, etc.
Fig. 2 Postings on TEI-L 1990–2007
TEI in a crystal ball
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 255
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 3 Numbers of posters on TEI-L 1990–2007
Fig. 4 Numbers of postings by the most active contributors (highest 10%)
F. Jannidis
256 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Many of the answers come from people encoding
similar texts with a similar perspective—what we
usually call a research field. It is also interesting to
note that some names of scholars well known for
their contributions to the theory of textual markup,
names like Dino Buzetti, Jerome McGann, Allen
Renear, or Peter Shillingsburg are rarely to be
found or are missing altogether as active posters.9
So maybe TEI is not a research community itself but
rather a place where many research communities
such as corpus linguistics, medieval studies,
modern literary studies, and others overlap to dis-
cuss more practical problems.10 Does this tell us
anything about the future of the TEI?
If there is something like a research community,
then an attempt to integrate researchers and to
mobilize them into participating actively should be
successful. And the numbers of active members
should significantly increase in the coming years.
If—on the other hand—TEI is not a research
community but mainly the intersection of different
communities, a market place for (mostly practical)
solutions to markup problems, then we probably
won’t see such a significant rise in the numbers of
active members because most people will use TEI to
achieve specific goals and will only come to the TEI
community to solve problems they can’t find a solu-
tion to themselves. In my experience of many dif-
ferent projects in the digital humanities over the last
10–15 years (mostly in Germany), I have had the
impression that many of them hesitate to contact
the TEI community and sometimes even choose a
home-grown solution destined to be less stabile and
never to be maintained. There are some practical
reasons for this; many scholars are not very familiar
with email-based discussion lists and the language
barrier is an impediment, but the main problem
seems to be one of perception: many people perceive
the TEI as a community to which their respective
communities do not intersect.
The TEI may be thought of in many ways as
being in a similar position as that of textual criti-
cism: it is part of many different disciplines, such as
literary studies, history, philosophy, but its role dif-
fers in those disciplines and although textual criti-
cism in these disciplines has a lot in common, there
are also very marked differences. Textual criticism
in German philology is in many important ways
quite different from textual criticism in English
studies, and the same is true for the relation of
text encoding and its relation to the scholarly field
making use of it: text encoding—even text encoding
using the TEI—inherits basic assumptions that are
quite different depending on the fields making use
of it.
So if we define a research field by a common
object—or a common construction of this
object—and a set of methods shared by all in this
field, if a research field is also defined by a common
research infrastructure including university insti-
tutes and positions, conferences, book series, jour-
nals, and other forms of organized exchange, then
the TEI is not a research community yet, but it
certainly is a community.
Nevertheless some practical questions remain:
how do we harvest the knowledge of those working
with digital texts to find the best concepts to
describe and encode them? The most effective
ways of aggregating knowledge at the moment are
the strategies used by open source communities and
Wikipedia—both are in use now for the further
development of the TEI.11 The archives of the dis-
cussion lists alone are a treasure trove for anyone
new to the mysteries of scholarly encoding.12 All this
makes TEI an important role model for new forms
of knowledge production that are in use elsewhere
but which the humanities are slow to adopt. The
technical complexities of using these tools still over-
whelm many newcomers and it is easy to foresee
that an expert knowledge base will be created in
the near future. Many of the elements of this knowl-
edge base and its distribution mechanisms are either
already in existence or planned like organized TEI
training courses, a content-rich TEI FAQ and TEI by
example.
3 TEI as a Set of Concepts and
a Set of Tags
The most important meaning of TEI, the main
reason the community and the organization devel-
oped and blossomed is without any doubt due to
the set of tags and their underlying concepts.
TEI in a crystal ball
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 257
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
In the last 20 years, TEI has become a de facto stan-
dard for literary computing. It is used in many
digital editions and in some corpora.13 Its impor-
tance for textual markup in the digital humanities
is also codified by its prominent place in modern
introductions into this field,14 and the fact that
the TEI is endorsed by many agencies involved in
funding digital libraries and electronic text
projects.15
The history of the TEI as a set of concepts and
their expression in a specific markup will be rich as
a source for future historians. The way this history
reflects the changing understanding of markup in
general is one of special note. The same is true for
the instruments to handle the growing complexity
of the guidelines as a set of texts, schemas, and soft-
ware to produce output formats.16
In the following, I can only point to some of
the more obvious trends of this multilayered
and complex development over the last twenty
years and I will concentrate on the way TEI
uses text types as a means to articulate the complex-
ity of text, and the relation of TEI to other
standards.
3.1 Text types
The following list shows the TEI versions and the
respective number of tags:
TEI version Number of tags
P1 (1990) 163
P2 (1992–93) 354
P3 (1994) 440
P4 (2002) 441
P5 (2007) 504
At first glance, there seems to be a continuous,
but not too excessive growth of knowledge, of con-
cepts, and of the numbers of tags. Based on these
numbers, P10 should have about 1,000 elements.
But numbers can be misleading. Between P4 and
P5, only about sixty new elements were added. But
the numbers belie the significance of the changes as
approximately eighty elements that are part of P4
were not incorporated into P5. In other words, the
TEI tag set has not only grown but it has also chan-
ged significantly over time and will, no doubt, con-
tinue to do so.
The main reason for this change is the fact that
TEI can be seen as the intersection of the perspectives
of different disciplines engaging with textual markup.
In most of them, the needs users have are becoming
more diverse, new needs arise, and old ones become
more complex. One of the resulting problems of the
TEI is its complexity: it needs to accommodate many
different disciplines in encoding their knowledge in a
way that is granular enough for their specific seman-
tic and textual practices. But its complexity is also the
main reason many people would rather learn how to
write their own schema than learn the TEI.
This problem seems to have been obvious to
many of those actively engaged in the TEI. The
pizza model, Roma, teiLite, all these were and are
ingenious solutions to this problem. But there is a
difference: using the Pizza Chef or Roma demands a
basic understanding of the whole of the TEI. You
have to know the outline of the TEI to decide what
you don’t need. teiLite, on the other hand, was a
small and self-contained subset. This is, no doubt,
one of the reasons it has been so successful.
Defining subsets for more sophisticated scholarly
text types together with a subset of the documenta-
tion could make the TEI more accessible. And refer-
encing these subsets in the TEI header so that people
can use them to access the texts, for example in
online searches, would make them even more useful.
I want to focus on just one aspect, i.e. grouping
elements by function drawn from the P5 version of
the Guidelines
Metadata
Organization of the TEI header
Text types
Elements available in all TEI documents
Default text structure
Prose
Verse
Performance texts
Dictionaries
Meta text types
Transcriptions of speech
Manuscript description
Representation of primary sources
Critical apparatus
Language corpora
F. Jannidis
258 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Textual aspects/elements
Representation of non-standard characters
and glyphs
Names, dates, people, and places
Tables, formulae, and graphics
Linking, segmentation, and alignment
Simple analytic mechanisms
Feature structures
Graphs, networks, and trees
Text types and tag groups in TEI P5
There are text types like drama, prose, etc. (and
in this category I included all tags shared by all text
types). But we also have scholarly text types like
critical editions, dictionaries, or language corpora
that function a bit like a wrapper for the first.
They communicate the subject-specific approach
to those simple text types. And there is a last
group that encodes specific aspects of the text,
such as persons, glyphs, tables, etc.
A look at these categories in the P1 version of the
Guidelines shows that early on the TEI as a com-
munity had more ambitious goals.
Metadata
Text types
Features common to many text types
Literary texts
Office texts
Dictionaries and lexica
Meta text types
Critical apparatus and parallel texts
Language corpora and other collections
Transcripts of spoken texts
Textual aspects/elements
Characters and character sets
Bibliographic control
Basic non-structural features
Appearance features
Figures, tables, formulas, and diagrams
Bibliographic references
Editorial comment and emendation
Ambiguous punctuation
Reference systems
Cross references and text links
Analytic and interpretive features
Text types and tag groups in TEI P1
We can see that the list of scholarly text types
handled by the TEI already exists in P1. The list of
textual aspects is longer here, and some of them are
less current such as the issues surrounding complex
character encoding. Other aspects seem to have too
much weight such as ambiguous punctuation that is
currently treated in a short subchapter. Similar to
bibliographic references, it is now part of the long
list of elements available in all TEI documents.
Probably of most interest is the list of text types
that the TEI intended to cover: not only literary
texts but also office documents.
If we look at the structure of P2 we see that
‘literary text’ has been substituted by a list: prose,
verse, drama, and letters, while the office documents
were dropped.
Metadata
TEI header
Text types
Tags available in all TEI DTDs
Default text structure
Base tag set for prose
Base tag set for verse
Base tag set for drama
Base tag set for letters and memoranda
Base tag set for printed dictionaries
Meta text types
Composite texts and combining bases
Base tag set for transcriptions of spoken texts
Base tag set for terminological data
Additional tag set for language corpora
Manuscripts
Textual aspects/elements
Segmentation and alignment
Simple analytic mechanisms
Feature structure analysis
Certainty
Analytic bibliography and physical description
Text criticism and apparatus
Names and dates
Graphs, digraphs, and trees
Graphics, figures, and illustrations
Formulae and tables
Text types and tag groups in TEI P2
TEI in a crystal ball
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 259
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Looking back to the P5 chart, we see that the list
of explicitly supported text types today is quite short
in comparison: no office documents, and still, after
20 years of the TEI, no letters and no tag set for the
physical description of books.17 When John
Lavagnino points out that many text types that are
not explicitly mentioned in the TEI Guidelines can
be encoded using the TEI by using a similar text
type (mostly prose) and by adding the elements
necessary for the purpose but not included in the
Guidelines, he certainly presents a position shared
by many in the TEI community (Lavagnino, 2006).
But this happens at the cost of interoperability:
there is thus some urgency to support these text
types and the markup of textual aspects important
to scholars in these fields.
Thus, one possible future for the TEI is to
include more of these text types. Without any
doubt, this will make the TEI even more complex
and will keep the rate of growth steep. Is this neces-
sary? Well, in the extreme, you could express almost
anything with just one block and one inline element
and put all other information into attributes. On the
other hand, you could have thousands of elements.
Finding the most sensible tradeoff is not easy. And
this is not only a technical decision. The naming of
elements and their description in the TEI guidelines
is most of the time informed by a special perspective
on texts: quite frequently you hear a linguist or a
literary studies person talking.18 To actively embrace
other disciplines in the humanities and to invite
them to collaborate in future development is the
obvious thing to do, and looking at the list of speak-
ers for the TEI conference in 2007 this has already
begun.
Another possible future for the TEI could be that
in the long run, it is only responsible for the meta
types because there are so many different text types
and the active management of all of them is too
complex. Another possibility is that the TEI is
responsible for everything, or, more probable, the
TEI is responsible for many meta types in the
Humanities and for those text types that draw
enough interest from within the TEI community.
But that seems to me to be the real problem: how
does the TEI community embrace newcomers who
want to handle new text types? There is always a
tension between a subject- or usage-specific
approach to a text—like the way linguists handle
texts or librarians—and a general markup system
aimed at all texts relevant for the humanities.
3.2 Neighbours
Early in 2007, there was a meeting of the TEI
Council in Berlin. A TEI Day accompanying the
meeting afforded the opportunity to present to the
Council a number of German projects that utilize
the TEI. During the discussion of one of these pro-
jects, a question arose; a question that had obviously
baffled more than one of the German presenters:
How do I encode a collection of texts like an anthol-
ogy with different text authors? The collective
wisdom of the Council smiled and said: ‘ah—
that’s an easy one: you use’, and at that moment
the collective voice suddenly split into two: ‘you use
METS’19 said one of them, ‘you use teiCorpus’ said
the other. Everyone who has ever read the TEI lists
knows about the many possibilities that exist for
encoding most textual features using the TEI. But
having a collection of texts by different authors and
in different text types is so common that you would
have expected that there has to be a generally
acknowledged way to handle this. But what was
even more striking for any onlooker was that there
was no consensus about whether this was a job that
should be handled by the TEI or by another
standard.
The relation of TEI to other standards—as far as
I can judge—has always been a very open one. If
there is a standard managing something in a way
useful to the humanities community, it was taken
up and integrated.20 Actually, the very first posting
archived on the TEI-L discussion list is a question
about another standard. Robin Cover asked:
Does anyone have access to ISO 639, and
would you be willing to summarize the infor-
mation on language codes? ISO 639 bears the
title (ca.) _Codes for the representation of
names of languages_, and according to the
ANSI office in New York, was updated in
1988. [. . .] A summary of language codes
would probably be worth posting publicly.21
F. Jannidis
260 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The email was answered by the Chairman of the
Registration Authority for this standard, who
pointed out that it ‘is considered inadequate for
bibliographic purposes’ and a working group has
been set up to create a new standard. In view of
the anecdote related above, it is a bit ironic that
the very next email asks: ‘Could someone please
explain the TEI approach to compound documents
and images? Will SGML be used here, and if so,
how?’ 22
But to return to the issue of TEI and other stan-
dards: Unicode, Xlink, and Xpointer, just to men-
tion a few, all solve problems that the TEI had
solved in earlier versions of the Guidelines. Some
of these developments are inspired or directly influ-
enced by the TEI or are the direct product of a
collaboration as the joint activity of the TEI together
with an ISO workgroup.23 In the former case, the
TEI delegates specific tasks to other standards. In
the last case, there is an overlap of TEI and another
standard.
Sometimes the collaboration with another stan-
dard is easier said than done. One example is the
question how to relate the TEI header to existing
bibliographical standards. At the end of the chapter
on the teiHeader there is a short section, a ‘Note for
Library Cataloguers’:
It is the intention of the developers, however,
to ensure that the information required for a
catalogue record be retrievable from the TEI
file header, and moreover that the mapping
from the one to the other be as simple and
straightforward as possible. Where the corre-
spondence is not obvious, it may prove useful
to consult one of the works which were influ-
ential in developing the content of the TEI file
header.24
Then there are references to The International
Standard Book Description, the Anglo-American
Cataloguing Rules, and the ANSI Z.39.29, conclud-
ing with the sentence: ‘Other relevant standards
include BS 1629:1989, BS 5605:1978, and BS
6371:1983.’
The combination of ‘simple and straightforward’
and the reference to six standards just by their
names not only have some comic aspects for
non-librarians but it also shows a clash of different
cultures. Even if this is really as simple and straight-
forward as possible for librarians, it certainly is a
deep mystery for most scholars who want to make
their TEI headers accessible to catalogues in the
most effective way, and who want to provide the
necessary information without becoming librarians.
Standardized headers and best practice examples are
probably all we need here and maybe a mechanism
to inform others which profile has been chosen.
The relation of METS to the TEI is probably a bit
more difficult. There are good arguments to choose
one over the other, but a literary scholar new to the
guidelines will be puzzled: in the guidelines, com-
pound texts are handled by ‘teiCorpus’, an element
which by its name signals its provenance from lin-
guistics (and the literary scholar has yet to find his
way to this section); while the use of METS isn’t
mentioned at all—quite in contrast to the way
XLink is referenced. And METS is in itself quite
complex that may prove too high a barrier for
many smaller digital edition projects to implement.
Despite these inconsistencies, the relation of TEI
to other standards is probably as explicit as it can be
considering the state of flux of most standards and
the ongoing development of new ones. In the long
run, TEI will probably leave other tasks to new stan-
dards. References to people, to named entities may
be such a case, but perhaps the new mechanism to
encode names in P5 will also be successful in other
fields not interested in textual markup. As the
people managing the TEI have done a remarkably
good job in providing a mechanism for integrating
new standards into the TEI, TEI’s future seems to be
bright from this perspective.
3.3 Sidenotes
Two small remarks at the end of this section: we still
await a TEI module to encode rhetorical aspects of
texts or narrative features as they are studied by
narratology. Although there is a mechanism for
encoding these kinds of features, i.e. ‘Simple
Analytical Mechanisms’ (chap. 17) and ‘Feature
Structures’ (chap. 18). These mechanisms are very
powerful but they have an interesting unintentional
result that the subject-specific knowledge (linguistic
language analyses, stylistic view on language,
TEI in a crystal ball
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 261
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
narratological view on a text, etc.) is not part of the
Guidelines and would need another home to be
standardized and documented. Is this really the
best path forward?
The TEI has done a significant amount to make it
possible to create digital editions. In some way, the
TEI is like a promise that our data will be useful in
100 years if we chose the right format. But we all
know that there is more to an edition than to
encode a text. In designing an edition, we also
create ways to approach the text and to interact
with it, in short visualization and functionality, i.e.
algorithms. We all know enough examples of digital
editions that demonstrate very clearly that editors
spend a lot of time thinking about the right interface
for their data, how to communicate their insights
and their special points of view in the most effective
ways, and how to offer special ways of retrieving the
text.25
Most of this information will be lost in a few
years. It would be very useful if we could archive
together with our text an abstract description of the
user interface and its functionality. The TEI header
would be a good place for something like this if
there were a useful way to describe this kind of
information in such a way that it can be utilized
mechanically. There is a lot of room and need for
development in this area.
4 Web x.0—or the Global Library
and Its Books
Most people involved in the TEI community know
that the information docuverse is changing drama-
tically, but we don’t know the exact nature of this
change nor how to bring our less tech-savvy collea-
gues into these new modes of scholarly communica-
tion. In many countries, there are very ambitious
projects to build up a national cyberinfrastructure.
In the UK, there was the Art and the Humanities
Data Service26—a showcase ehumanities center
avant la lettre. In the Netherlands, there is
DANS27 in Germany where there are large Projects
like eSciDoc28 or Textgrid29 that aim to be the
building blocks for such a structure. In the USA,
there are similar endeavours under way as the
report of the American Council of the Learned
Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for
the Humanities and Social Sciences demonstrates.30
Basically this means, after the client–server architec-
ture of the first computer generation, the local
applications of the PC generation, and the webser-
ver applications of the WWW generation, we now
have a service-based architecture allowing people to
plug together their own ensemble of data sources
and functions via web services.
One of the main goals of these initiatives is to set
up an infrastructure that allows easy access to data
and services without bothering where the software
and where the content (text, film, images) is. Until
now, the main goal of a digital humanities project
was to put its data online. TEI was mainly used as an
archive format to provide sustainability or as an
exchange format for the larger collections in digital
libraries. Some even used it as working format creat-
ing their editions in TEI from the beginning. Only
in very rare cases the TEI encoded texts were acces-
sible to the reader and user of an edition.
Interoperability was important only for projects or
digital libraries providing a common interface to
their resources.
The basic idea of building up the new infrastruc-
ture is to have interoperability between different
projects, digital libraries, etc. And this interoperabil-
ity does not only exist at the data level but also on
the level of functions and of services handling the
data. We can expect to see a common interface to
data and services that will allow users to access them
as needed to solve specific problems. From the point
of a linguist or a literary scholar, the architecture
might look like this:
The working environment of the scholar would
show him in a transparent way31 the available
resources and service and allow him to assemble
the component parts as per his needs. One of the
interesting aspects of this infrastructure would be
the fact that every time a scholar has invested
some time and knowledge into adding information
to a text, this could be the starting point for some-
one else. Maybe the first has created catalogue data
and digitized the text, the second scholar may then
provide a transcription of a facsimile, or to
add markup to an existing digital source and to
F. Jannidis
262 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
analyse the text from some discipline-specific point
of view (Fig. 5).
The term ‘ratchet effect’ has been used in many
disciplines to describe the ‘phenomenon that some
processes cannot go backwards once certain things
have happened’.32 The ratchet allows the wheel to
move in one direction but every time it clicks it
prevents it from moving backwards. Like a ratchet,
so evolutionary psychologists assume, culture allows
the accumulation of information. People born into
a culture contribute to the movement of the wheel
but culture itself stops the loss of information. The
famous notion of a dwarf standing on the shoulders
of a giant and thus seeing more than the giant has
often been applied to the field of science. It
expresses a similar concept of an accrual of infor-
mation. Humanities find it notoriously difficult to
accrue knowledge in a similar way. It is my belief
that with an architecture, as these projects have, it
will be possible to achieve similar effects in the
realm of textual studies.
4.1 What does this mean for the TEI?
First of all (and there is nothing new here), many
projects and libraries will use TEI. Second, one can
use the knowledge in TEI to solve some of the
problems in the approach outlined. What could
such an interface possibly provide which isn’t
done better and faster by Google? Google, at the
moment, does exceedingly well in providing
ranked results of full text searches including all the
millions of books Google has digitized. As the
Internet consists of text coming from all kind of
sources, this may be for some time the best we
can expect. But this full-text search can’t differenti-
ate between names and places; it doesn’t know
whether something is the title of a book, or just
mentioned in a text. But in an environment that is
much smaller but controlled, the world of the digital
libraries and archives, this seems to be an unneces-
sary loss of information. There are many interesting
ideas as to how to change this situation, for example
the vision of the semantic web. But maybe the more
complex proposals demand too much even for an e-
humanities environment. In the Textgrid project,
we use text types as a concept to provide additional
information that allows the reuse of texts in a more
intelligent way.33 Let’s take the example of a dic-
tionary: a full text search, mainly oriented along
the physical document structure, can be very
useful. But searches can be improved dramatically
based on an understanding of the way a dictionary is
Fig. 5 Schema of a future working environment of a scholar
TEI in a crystal ball
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 3, 2009 263
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
structured. For example, you can limit the search to
those entries that encode the search term as the
lemma.
This sounds like something that has been done
before: creating a subset of TEI, declaring it to be if
not best, at least a good practice, and building soft-
ware to interface with this data structure.34 The only
difference this time is that we dismissed the idea of
the best practice. Rather, we defined a format that
will not be at any time the project format but just an
internal representation of the lowest common
denominator. On the other hand, it supports
those forms of access to a text type that are most
often used. Basically from all texts a dumbed down
version or view is created that allows us to access
them using the basic text type information.
Another problem is how to provide links in such
an environment. The main question seems to be
whether we can find a way to target text below the
level of the whole text in a way that is not technically
defined but by the conventions people use for texts.
It would be very nice if we could link to the first
page of the first edition of Franz Kafka’s The Trial
without having to bother how this page has been
encoded.
Coming from this application of the TEI, the
integration of more text types into the Guidelines
seems to be a promising way to extend the uses of
the TEI.
5 Conclusion
The TEI Community has quite a lot to do in the
coming years—at all levels of meaning which repre-
sent these three letters. But it has an impressive
track record and if there is a similar conference in
20 years—and I would bet that there will be a simi-
lar one—and things continue to progress, TEI will
still be the role model for ‘doing’ humanities in the
digital world.
