Material text, immaterial text, and
the electronic environment1
............................................................................................................................................................
Kathryn Sutherland
St Anne’s College, University of Oxford, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Digital modes of editing ask us to re-examine the past century of editorial theory
and to situate emerging editorial approaches within this history. Using the com-
puter as a new textual medium has brought about a renewed interest in the
conditions for representation. This article concerns itself with how books and
computers, respectively, represent texts, and how critical editing mediates or
organizes those representations. It was written in 1997 as a critical response to
J.J. McGann’s essay ‘The Rationale of Hypertext’.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
This essay was written in 1997. It has not been sig-
nificantly updated but reflects that particular
moment in the debate on electronic text
1
It seems timely to situate certain aspects of our cur-
rent preoccupation with the electronic storage and
manipulation of textual states within a larger and
older debate about texts, and to do so as part of an
attempt to reflect upon the determining conditions
of electronic representation. A great deal is said
nowadays, in celebratory and alarmist style, about
the computer as a new machine of knowledge; what
is proposed for consideration here is something less
heady: how a renewed interest in the conditions for
representation, which the computer as a new textual
medium inaugurates, might be made to serve a cri-
tical understanding of the structures of representa-
tion. As a topic for examination, this has more to do
with the question of what are computers (or books)
good for than with the implied question to which
the celebrants and alarmists alike respond—are
computers (books) good? I invoke the book as
representational medium alongside the computer
because, just as it is no mere coincidence that our
relatively new attention to the History of the Book
is co-eval with our recognition of the computer as
a text processor and not just a number cruncher,
so our attempts to comprehend just how computers
represent texts are highly dependent on an under-
standing of how books do it. This is reinforced by
the fact that when we create an electronic text, we
are still quite likely to be determined in our repre-
sentational choices by the representational filter of
the book—most obviously in the form of some
physical instantiation of the text which we have in
front of us, in a book, and which functions as the
Thing to be represented, the Real Thing (rather than
as an alternative representation); more subtly, as the
notional reality or meta-form of an original inten-
tion which has been compromised in its commercial
production, a slippage occurring, as it were, between
the book in its conceptual or ideal and its vehicular
states. We may know that a writer’s relation to the
printed and published book is not identical to a
painter’s relation to a completed canvas, but we
have tended to assume that it means to be. The
subjects I want to touch on, then, have to do with
representation—with how books represent texts,
with how critical editing mediates or organizes
those representations, and with how computers
represent texts, and whether they are all represent-
ing the same Real Thing, with varying degrees of
success or failure.
Correspondence:
Kathryn Sutherland,
St Anne’s College, Oxford,
OX2 6HS, UK.
E-mail:
kathryn.sutherland@
st-annes.ox.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009.  Indiana University Press. This essay originally appeared as
‘Revised Relations? Material Text, Immaterial Text, and the Electronic Environment’, TEXT, 11 (1998). Permission for its
reproduction here is kindly granted by current copyright holders, Indiana University Press
99
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn033
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
My starting points are two opposed positions on
the modern textual condition which in fact share a
fundamental assumption. One is the unself-con-
sciously elitist and unregenerately Coleridgean
thesis propounded by George Steiner in his book--
length essay of 1989, Real Presences; the other is the
more generously socialized and liberal formulation
variously offered in the course of the 1990s in the
critical writings of George Landow, Robert Lanham,
and Jay David Bolter, and in the editorial statements
of electronic archivists Peter Donaldson and Jerome
McGann. Steiner’s belief is that the electronic repre-
sentation and therefore wide (Steiner assumes a con-
nection here that is not in fact unproblematic)
promulgation of literary texts destroys their aesthetic
power in the interests of a false immediacy of deliv-
ery; the Lanham, Donaldson, and McGann view is
that to computerize is to transcend the contingencies
of circumstance and to gain access to a fuller textual
(and perhaps aesthetic) record. For Steiner, for
whom ‘real presence’ is theologically rooted in the
condition of ‘real absence’ or more properly in ‘the
real absence of that presence’, what is at stake in the
electronic storage, retrieval, and circulation of culture
in the form of literary texts is our capacity to imagine
their absence and so to internalize their meanings
(what he refers to as the ‘ingestion’ as distinct from
the ‘consumption’ of texts). He writes, ‘[t]he danger
is that the text [in the computer] . . . will lose what
physics calls its ‘‘critical mass’’, its implosive powers
within the echo chambers of the self.’2 As this quo-
tation suggests, Steiner’s argument is impelled by
the now familiar terms of the critique of postmo-
dern critique and poses a challenge to consumerism
as socially and individually determining in the form
of a belief in the integrated self, which is all the more
urgent because it may only be through the encoun-
ter with great works of art that self comes into
being.
For the celebrants of the new textual environ-
ment, it is the computer’s capacity to store text as
what cultural historians call ‘thick’ representation
(and text encoders might call ‘rich’ or ‘deep’ repre-
sentation) and to enlarge and proliferate the textual
grain in various ways (through multi-versioning,
enhanced digital imaging, interactive collation,
etc.) which constitutes a new understanding of
‘real presence’. Writing of the polytextual and
multimedia Shakespeare Electronic Archive then
under development at MIT, and as if countering
the danger Steiner forsees, Peter Donaldson argues
that the ‘dynamic, transformative quality of the
composite environment of the computer screen
makes against passive immersion in illusionist
space’, through its ‘oscillation between abstraction
and realistic representation’; while in another
essay, ‘The Rationale of Hypertext’, Jerome
McGann challenges the selective editorial principles
of Walter Greg and the New Bibliography with a
new agenda, one which, he argues, is more faithful
and accountable to the productive conditions (and
reproductive limitations) of multiply-intended doc-
umentary states as well as to the internal and exter-
nal relations of certain textual works. As befits an
essay in consciously revisionary relation to a ‘gen-
eral theory of copy-text’, McGann’s hypertextual
rationale depends upon the proliferation of discrete
examples which themselves share no common fea-
tures. He cites the example of Emily Dickinson as an
author whose work is badly served by what he calls a
‘typographical edition’ because ‘the genres that
determine the aspirations of her work are scriptural
rather than bibliographical’, and he cites the exam-
ple of William Wordsworth as one whose complex
revisionary practices are impossible to reproduce
adequately in the context of a ‘codex-based scholarly
edition’. Both, he argues, are among those many
authors (he cites Blake, Burns, and the unlikely
Laetitia Landon) whose work is ‘seriously ham-
pered’ in its edited representation ‘by the limits of
the book as a critical tool’.3 All will be better served
by the hypermedia electronic archive. I return to the
cases of Wordsworth and Burns later.
What is at stake, on screen and off, appears to be
the possibility of a heightened textual encounter (for
Steiner, in the heart and mind; for McGann, on the
computer screen/via the computer memory) which
is premissed in each case upon the capacity to over-
come the material constraints upon text and to
reconstitute its immanence under controlled condi-
tions of material absence. Both McGann and Steiner
are concerned in their arguments with the book as
vehicular form and with the conditions for the
reception of text, not of its creation. However, for
K. Sutherland
100 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Steiner the book as textual container implies none
of the threat to ‘critical mass’ that computerized
dissemination raises; while for McGann the limita-
tions of the book form as analytic tool mean that it
can be deeply inauthentic in its textual dealings.
Interestingly, the difference points to an important
continuity between the traditional paper and the
electronic investment in texts—what might be for-
mulated, crudely at this stage, as a concern with the
relation of parts to wholes, of material parts to ideal
wholes. Getting close, getting closer, getting even
closer to the represented thing is what the cultural
commentator, the literary critic, the text editor,
and the electronic archiver all tend to believe lies
behind and, of course, justifies, their diverse
procedures.
2
I want to turn now to one obvious shared ground
for these apparently opposed positions over the
conditions for textual representation: romantic
ideology, whose concern for the unitary subject
finds expression in the ironic logic of the fragment,
the simultaneous site of failed textual recuperation
and of aesthetic transformation. Romantic literature
can be described as detail on the grand scale, an
absorbent detailism which through careful local
deployment subsumes those conceptual wholes
which prescribe its ambitious philosophical or aes-
thetic agendas. This project involved romantic writ-
ers in a revaluation of the detail. In the literature of
romanticism, detail (as presence) is legitimated by a
rule of appearance through which it annexes the
whole (as absence) to itself. Many statements of
what we recognize as the romantic case in literature
can be read as rescue bids, attempts to override the
debasing material gravitation to the detail—as mere
detail—through recourse not to an objectivity, the
other pole of a dialectic that opposes the transcen-
dent to the immanent, the general to the local, but
to a subjectivity which is total in its situatedness,
thoroughly rather than contingently grounded—a
detailism that is neither relative nor disconnected
but co-extensive with the whole. Accordingly,
among the main devices of the romantic case are
the fragment and the symbol, which through an
ironic failure of representation succeed more
powerfully than representation. They substitute—
in the recuperative ideation of the fragment, in the
intensity of the symbol—an assumed totality for the
less effective, the compromised, work of realized
production.4
It is worth reminding ourselves that the deeply
held resistance to the tyranny of social-fashioning
lying at the heart of this idealizing procedure is
often figured in romantic writings as an associated
annexation or rejection of the book as a suspect
instrument of knowledge. This highly defensive
strategy, born of a material recoil, has been much
rehearsed, within romantic and contemporary argu-
ment, as the consequence of a series of changes in
the conditions of cultural production occurring in
the course of the eighteenth century and involving,
among other factors, improvements in the dissemi-
nation of literature and in the means of its mechan-
ical reproduction, in the growth of mass reading
audiences, and in the commodification of cultural
relations.5 Romanticism positions itself in critical
relation to all these.
The romantic writer acknowledges the hegemony
of literature but deplores the consumer cachet of the
printed text, the partiality, as he sees it, of its con-
tents, and the suborned agency of its structures,
through which the to-be-known is pre-empted by
the already known and truth is bartered for accessi-
bility or superficial variety—so much so that he
situates his creative labour outside the economy of
books. This is a recurrent, if somewhat curious pro-
cedure, in which the incarnational written text
repudiates in advance its vehicular print form. In
Book 12 of the 1805 Prelude (Book 13 of the 1850
version), a continuation of the previous Book,
‘Imagination, how impaired and restored’
(‘Imagination and Taste, how impaired and
restored’ in 1850), Wordsworth sets the instructive
power of the poet’s ‘intellectual eye’ against the
intoxications of a world of ‘present objects’, and
the naturalizing properties of ‘a work of mine/
Proceeding from the depth of untaught things’
against ‘books [which] mislead us . . ./Effeminately
level down the truth’.6 This bibliographic recoil,
itself the sign of a conjoined unease about mass
Text and electronic environment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 101
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
literacy and the seductiveness of the mere detail, has
an Enlightenment and (predictably) a gendered
ancestry. In Book 5 of Emile (1762), Rousseau
equates femininity and reading as twin aspects of
a contingent socialization that jeopardizes and con-
fines the abstract powers of the male; in An Essay on
the History of Civil Society (1767), Adam Ferguson
opposes the book as instrument of knowledge to the
activity of understanding: ‘[T]he knowledge of
books’, he claims, shackles the intellectual energy
in a commercial society and inhibits the freedom
of ‘the inquisitive or animated spirit’, which
impels writing.7 For Ferguson, at the other end of
the continuum from Derrida, it is the beginning of
the book that signals the end of writing.
For Wordsworth, it is only the naturalization (as
opposed to the socialization) of knowing that resists
commodification (as feminization and confine-
ment) by grounding the work of writing in the revi-
sionary subject, the self sustained over time through
the authenticating act of rewriting. His deferral of
publication—of being brought to book—is well-
attested, as is his sister Dorothy’s substitutory prac-
tice of copying and recopying manuscript versions.
For Hazlitt, in essays like ‘On Reading New
Books’ and ‘On Modern Comedy’, the task becomes
one of negotiating between a pre-linguistic integrity
of vision, the direct outcome of ‘personal and local
attachments’, and a centralized distribution of
experience through books which fetishize words by
removing them from—substituting them for—their
referents.
He writes:
It is, indeed, the evident tendency of all litera-
ture to generalize and dissipate character, by
giving men the same artificial education, and
the same common stock of ideas; so that
we see all objects from the same point of
view, and through the same reflected
medium;—we learn to exist, not in ourselves,
but in books;—all men become alike mere
readers—spectators, not actors in the scene,
and lose all proper personal identity.8
Coleridge’s attack, in Chapter 2 of Biographia
Literaria, upon the printroom, scene for the stereo-
typic replication of surfaces, in which a levelling
iteration deputizes for individual knowing/the
knowing individual, is familiar. Less familiar,
because undeveloped, is his early proposal to
Joseph Cottle, the Bristol publisher of Lyrical
Ballads, for ‘an Essay on the Metaphysics of
Typography’.9 One of the many essays Coleridge
never wrote, it suggested itself at a time when he
and Wordsworth were actively engaged with the
typographical features of the 1798 Lyrical Ballads
(negotiating for ink quality, depth of margins,
lines to the page, etc.). It can be imagined as an
extended enquiry into the possibility of reconciling
intellectual and material text, incarnational and
vehicular form, whereby bibliographic codes ideate
and substantiate the ‘One Text’, something like a
resolution of the classic twentieth-century textual
critical opposition between the specificity of the
social text and the conceptual integrity of the ideal
text.
In fact, when Wordsworth and Coleridge name
the One Text, they describe, as postmodern thinkers
will, a set of multi-form spatial relations—in this
case, a building not a book. To Wordsworth the
poem that became known as The Prelude relates to
his great work The Recluse as ‘the ante-chapel . . . to
the body of a gothic church’, while his ‘minor
Pieces . . . when they shall be properly arranged,
will be found by the attentive Reader to have such
connection with the main Work as may give them
claim to be likened to the little cells, oratories, and
sepulchral recesses, ordinarily included in those edi-
ficies.’10 Coleridge, in a lecture of 1818 ‘On the
Manners, Morals, Literature . . . of the (so called)
Dark Ages of Europe’, explains, after Hegel, how
‘Gothic architecture impresses the beholder with a
sense of self-annihilation; he becomes, as it were, a
part of the work contemplated. An endless complex-
ity and variety are united into one whole, the plan of
which is not distinct from the execution’.11 Unlike
the hand-held book, the Gothic work holds, locates,
the reader whose identity is absorbed and reconfi-
gured within its expansive and transforming space
and as a part of its vital, organic homogeneity, its
reconciliation of part to whole. It is an incorpora-
tion which implies a new form of self-knowing
through textual situatedness, or the presence of
the self in the text.
K. Sutherland
102 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3Most of the theorizing that underlies contem-
porary practices of editing modern literary texts is
informed by romantic ideology and responds to its
driving concern with how parts represent wholes.
There was a time, and not so long ago, when the
question of literary ontology, the aesthetic problem
of how a work exists, was answered in the Anglo-
American tradition by a trans-historically applied
recourse to an authorial or textual intention which
owed much to our identification of the author with
the Wordsworthian poet or revisionary genius.
By extension, the editorial critical concern with
how best to represent that existence established a
theory and pragmatics of textual meaning which
shifted, with the freight of its romantic assumptions
about originality and its suspicion of socially
mediated forms, between final and earliest versions.
New Bibliography—or classic text criticism as it is
now often called, to distinguish it from more recent
reconceptions of the theory and discipline of text—
is ennobled by an assimilation of editing to the
romantic belief in the poet’s work of ideal creation
or the restitution of that which is lost. Emendation,
the select but discrete display of variants, and the
eclectic but shaped reading text, incorporating first
and last intentions, are the procedures by which a
unity of subject (an ideal wholeness which is both
work and author) is excavated from its frail material
witnesses, its contingent parts, and given substance
in another such. The unitary text of the New
Bibliographer is justified by recourse to intention
rather than circumstance. It is both an intellectual
abstraction (text raised to its highest level and evac-
uated of a certain kind of social determination,
usually termed corruption) and a hyposta-
sization, text given substance as concession to the
physical.12
Impelled, on the one hand, by the attachments of
locality and, on the other, by the vast communica-
tions networks that deliver and replicate our local
desires, the combinatory energies of the postmodern
consensus have an obvious relation to the situated
transcendence of romantic subjectivity; but it is rela-
tion by inversion. What Terry Eagleton called the
utopian function of the ‘cult of the text’13 within
postmodern discourse substitutes the heterogeneous
riot of the multi- and trans-disciplinary for the uni-
versalizing inwardness of the One Text. In labelling
this rampant textualism utopian, Eagleton, at the
risk of naivety, points to its illusory release of
the signifier from the constraints of the real and
the confiscation of energy (the energy for ‘actual
realization’, for engagement, that is) that this
implies: utopias, textual or otherwise, are of
course ‘no places’ as well as ‘good places’. The local-
ism of the postmodern, like the local attachment of
the romantic imagination, is defenceless against the
charge of social disengagement; and this applies
equally to the units of local meaning within the
electronic textbase—the encoded transcription or
the scanned manuscript image—which are not com-
pelled into social relations with one another but
forever isolated and promiscuously combinable. As
in the romantic source, postmodern localism exists
under the sign of irony, as a function of a larger
imaginary synthesis, one that now replaces meta-
physical universals and totalities with globally dis-
persed informatic systems. The effect is to
reformulate the relation of detail to whole as one
of detail to ever more detail.14
Arguing against both the dominant fashion for
unrevised or ‘primitive’ Wordsworth and the call
for a truly plural text (Jonathan Wordsworth sug-
gested sixteen discrete versions of The Prelude prior
to its 1850 publication),15 Zachary Leader, in a
study of romantic authors and revision, made a
deeply unfashionable case for late versions and for
an ethics of editing based on the reinterpretation of
intention as a ‘responsibility to persons’.16 In this
light, late Wordsworth, the revisionary author of the
1850 Prelude, is no longer the betrayer or falsifier of
his own best intentions but a continually intending
poet whose reworkings carry the moral weight of
what would in law constitute a last will and testa-
ment, with the attendant obligation on the editor to
respect these over all other readings. It seems highly
unlikely that scholars will respond to Leader’s rea-
soning; far more likely that they will continue to
contest the very notion of authorial property in
the literary text that Wordsworth himself fought
to extend and that underlies a belated appeal to a
textual ethics.
Text and electronic environment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 103
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Why this seems such a lost cause is because in
our postmodern understanding the romantic sub-
ject exists no longer under the sign of authorial
thrift but of a textual plenitude that refigures the
subject as a set of subject positions, interior to
rather than anterior to or outside their textual trans-
missions, with no necessary priority given to one
transmission over another, no determining
sequence. It is in this way that the discursive post-
modern text registers as depthlessness what once
was discerned as authorial development, the
shaped life. Our own subject positions, as inhabi-
tants of the postmodern social text, mimic this shift-
ing positionality. Not only is the unified author
dead but so too is the unified reader and, with the
reader, the need for a consensual critical distance
from the field of textual production and reception.
This is particularly the case in the electronic envi-
ronment, where the One Text of romantic idealiza-
tion (and eclectic text editing) becomes the textbase.
As the utopian ground (or ‘no place’) of postmo-
dern situatedness, the textbase is a digital quantifi-
cation of what in the analogue realm (perhaps for
no necessary reason other than economy) must exist
under the sign of quality, by which I mean reasoned
or justified choice. The textbase replaces conceptual
(or economic) wholeness with what Marvin
Spevack, in a witty article, described as ‘hyper-
trophy’, ‘an abnormal increase in size, an excres-
cence which is essentially additive and cumulative
in nature’.17 Where the eclectic ideal-text edition
presumed, in accordance with its Coleridgean ante-
cedents, to tell us how to know, through a combina-
tion of abstracted and hypostatized textual states,
the empowering of detail to the point of superabun-
dance reveals an anxiety about what to know, and
replaces the implied certainty of general principles
with informatic excess, detail at the service of detail,
in a hypothesized totality which assures us only of
instability and impermanence. (I am, at the risk of
provocation, assuming excess to be the necessary
informing principle in the organization of electronic
data—not because there are not some very elegant
examples of organizational restraint in the presenta-
tion of materials in the electronic medium, but
because restraint, like monotextuality or the selec-
tive representation of variants, is inauthentic in
terms of the capabilities of the electronic medium.)
It is now something of a truism that the compu-
ter models and accelerates the deconstructive possi-
bilities inherent in postmodern ways of knowing. As
an archiving tool of immense (but often short-lived)
power, it stores and gives access to particulars. It
works in the service of that detailism which informs
the current fashion for closely bit-mapped projects
(computerized and not) across a range of micro-
centres grouped loosely under the macro-context
of cultural studies (and, of course, History of the
Book is among these); in their close-grained, data-
rich saturation, such projects have appeared to some
textuists to give a new priority to the labour and
detritus of text editing itself. But the computer also,
of course, signals an end, not of editing, but of
certain kinds of assumptions about editing. Even
under the most idealizing principles, editing has
always been the outgrowth of social assumptions
whose adjustment then calls for new editions:
works which are edited definitively for all time are
works we no longer need. There is no reason to
imagine, then, that editing will not continue into
the computer age. However, the strictures of con-
tingency are likely to operate more powerfully in the
electronic environment because of its expansionist
agenda—more manuscripts, more transcripts, more
digital facsimiles, all the variant forms, etc.—the
corollary of which is probably more editorial activ-
ity, and certainly more textual critical gestures
informing the interpretations of non-editors, and
perhaps a more informed selection of particular
readings for provisional purposes, but in the service
of a distributed model of editing and its aims:
in other words, a reinterpretation of editorial
activity in the service of local enrichment. This
may in fact lead to that genuinely informed and
mutually informing exchange that textual criticism
and literary criticism have occasionally promised
themselves they would work towards, now that
the textbase and hypermedia archive together
provide the conditions for combining the two
activities.
K. Sutherland
104 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4As editorial or archival space, the electronic envi-
ronment, so many of its exponents seem to suggest,
implies a resolution of the dilemma of the idealist
text critic confronted with the incompatibility of
real parts and notional wholes. Electronic editors
are increasingly intrigued by the potential to deliver
texts whose publication in book form, as they see it,
compromises their integrity or diminishes their
textual range in some vital way. So argue editors
of dramatic texts, like Peter Donaldson, who under-
stands hypermedia resources as the occasion to
represent the complex variance of text—written
and printed, but also the performance text, the audi-
ally recorded text, and the reception text. Dramatic
texts, we might agree, are a special case; so, too,
though for different reasons, the customized iconic
poetry of Blake, and again, for yet other different
reasons, the scriptural, homecrafted designs of
Emily Dickinson.18 In the case of dramatic texts,
it is the heritable variation of their cultural trans-
mission which is at stake; in the case of Blake or
Dickinson, it is the authorial limitation of the sig-
nifying process. In the one example, electronic
representation maps textual receptiveness to evolu-
tion; in the other, it simulates resistance. Either way,
electronic representation, it would seem, gets us
closer to the real thing.
Where we used to idealize the text we now
romance the text. Characterized as excess and as
the conflation of high and low culture, romance
is, as Henry James nervously remarked in the
Preface to The American, liberational: ‘the kind of
experience with which it deals’, James continued, is
‘experience disengaged, disembroiled, disencum-
bered, exempt from the conditions that we usually
know to attach to it’.19 In generic terms, romance
functions as a counter-discourse to history and real-
ism, but also to the rigorous abstraction of the ideal.
That process which, beginning in romanticism,
caught up the detail in the transvaluation of the
local, the anecdotal, and the autobiographical,
might be said to have started the work of erosion
whereby strategic detailism, after Foucault and
Derrida, is now the privileged method of analysis.20
The romantic concern with the detail simulta-
neously witnesses to the failure of textual represen-
tation (the failure to represent the text as it exists in
the mind) and to the compensatory act of holistic
creation following that failure: the recuperation of
detail through the idealizing project of failed repre-
sentation itself. Detail thus becomes the effective
sign of wholeness, as in the architectural topos of
the ruin or its textual equivalent, the fragment,
which function as metaphors for the collapse of
representation and through which representation
is intensified and symbolically superseded. In a
further act of displacement, the synecdochic power
of the detail functions as its own self-legitimating
episteme. Now, detail seduces us from our enquiry
into wholeness, no mere substitute for but an anni-
hilation (by which term Coleridge implied ‘absorp-
tion’) of order and shape in the service of an ever
richer accumulation and a more privileged insight.
As romance is to idealism so is the practice
and rhetoric of much current electronic archiving
to eclectic text editing. In a 1998 article, Bruce
Graver and Ronald Tetreault set out some of
the principles and procedures determining their
electronic edition of Lyrical Ballads then in devel-
opment with Cambridge University Press. In Graver
and Tetreault’s description, the edition would
include:
full texts of all the authorized editions of
Lyrical Ballads published in the poets’ life-
times, the full text of the unauthorized
Philadelphia Lyrical Ballads of 1802, full tran-
scriptions of the surviving printers’ manu-
scripts housed in the Beinecke Library at
Yale, and over a thousand images of manu-
scripts and printed pages, including complete
sets of the pages of the authorized editions of
the collection. Our texts will be fully search-
able, according to a variety of criteria, and we
will provide images of rare printed variants,
such as cancels and paste-ins. No library pos-
sesses the range of copies that we will repro-
duce, and no exhibition, even in the
bicentenary year of 1998, will bring them
Text and electronic environment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 105
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
together in one place. But in the virtual space
of our edition, they will all be present.21
Concerned to distinguish their electronic edition
from the 1992 variant text printed edition of
James Butler and Karen Green in the Cornell
Wordsworth, Graver and Tetreault pointed to the
absence of a single ‘best’ reading text and to the
dynamic instability of their multiple reading texts
as contributing to the new ‘understanding of the
mode of existence of a literary work of art’. In this
view, they argued, interlinked electronic hypertext
might provide a practical demonstration of Jack
Stillinger’s ‘theory of ‘‘textual pluralism’’, in which
a ‘‘work’’ of literature becomes an abstract organiz-
ing principle around which every physically embo-
died version (published editions, manuscript drafts,
etc.) is grouped, as a text among texts to be viewed
both separately and simultaneously with all its
cognates’.
What Graver and Tetreault, in fact, proposed as
the significant characteristic of the electronic edition
is its demonstration of—as opposed to its abstrac-
tion of—variance, whereby what features in print as
‘the difficult technical vocabulary of bibliographical
description’, the arbitrary apparatus criticus of sub-
stantive and accidental change, are given in full as
opposed to being selectively schematized. What is
interesting in practice about this procedure is the
principle of organization it implies for the fully
searchable multi-text edition. Where in the eclectic
or ideal printed edition a copy-text is selected as the
basis upon which to construct the single composite
witness which, for the purposes of the edition, then
functions as the only text of the work (all note-
worthy departures from it being recorded in their
textless state), in the electronic edition a ‘variant
map’ substitutes for and inverts the concept of
copy-text by anchoring the multiple full-text ver-
sions to a record of their identity only. The variant
map still functions as a continuous, privileged read-
ing text whose identity consists of a conflation of
all witnesses, but it lapses into temporary non-
existence when its shared identity is no longer con-
firmed, and, importantly, it possesses heuristic
rather than definitive status. (As if to emphasize
its retained privileges, Graver and Tetreault position
their map in the dominant reading position, in the
left-hand portion of the screen, running continu-
ously from top to bottom; furthermore, unlike
their treatment of the full variant texts, they provide
it with line numbering for orientation.) In other
words, the variant map is a composite text with
omitted as distinct from selected readings; variants
are not recorded but described as a means of locat-
ing them in their respective full texts, where, of
course, they do not function as discrete variants
but holistically, as the aggregated textual record.
This is not to jettison the principles of collation
and emendation, but to turn them on their
head, in the process inverting (but not abandoning)
the New Bibliographical method of eclectic
editing: now the composite text (formerly the phy-
sical instantiation of the ‘work’) functions as the
fragment and the variant is given full-text status.
This is ingenious both as a critique of the eclectic
method and as a solution to its partiality. But it
brings its own problems—in particular, problems
connected with the degree of expansion that the
refusal of a thorough-going system of abstraction
requires.
Orientation between and within large masses of
variant text makes great demands to do with pre-
sentation and searchability on the electronic editor,
text-technician/encoder (who may or may not be
identical with the editor), and the user (and we
are dealing here only with the relatively short texts
of Lyrical Ballads, not with a sixteen-version
Prelude). At the moment, screen design (and size)
allows for four variant texts plus map to be exam-
ined simultaneously in the electronic Lyrical Ballads,
which means that the holistic variant context can
only be viewed selectively, in stages. The method
may expose the fragile authority of the eclectic
text, but the eclectic text retains its privileged
status, only now on the declared grounds of its
fragmentariness as opposed to its critical comple-
tion. Having exposed, by its capacity for more, the
partiality of the eclectic printed edition, the anti-
theoretic drive which shapes the critique of ima-
gined wholes as the electronic relocation of full
variant texts has little intellectual defence against
the same charge of partiality, which can still and
always be levelled. As David Greetham tellingly
phrased the question, rehearsing arguments posed
K. Sutherland
106 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
by Foucault and others, ‘how much is ‘‘everything’’,
and what specific combination(s) of the compo-
nents of everything engender(s) meaning?’22 The
problem does not go away.
Noting, quite properly, the accommodation
between the hierarchized, abstract textual machinery
of New Bibliography and the strictures of book as
vehicular form, the electronic editor less properly
assumes that the conceptualization implied by the
one and the limits imposed by the other happily
fall together. Consider now these two statements.
The first is from G. Thomas Tanselle, the latest
defender of the idealist, eclectic method in text
editing:
Verbal works, being immaterial, cannot be
damaged as a painting or a sculpture can;
but we shall never know with certainty what
their undamaged form consists of, for in their
passage to us they are subjected to the hazards
of the physical.23
The second is from Jerome McGann’s proposal
for an audial hypermedia edition, with musical
scores and sung interpretation, of Robert Burns’s
complete works:
Burns’s work is grounded in an oral and song
tradition . . . What if one could have a critical
edition of Burns’s work in audial forms that
allowed one to engage the songs in the same
kind of scholarly environment that we know
and value in works like the Kinsley/Clarendon
edition? An environment allowing one to
navigate between versions, to compare var-
iants, an environment able to supply the cen-
tral documents with a thick network of related
critical and contextual information that helps
to elucidate the works? What if one could do
that? The point is, we can.24
What McGann here calls for is not so much an
edition of Burns’s works as a repository of the mate-
rials Burns worked with and from; substituting for
Kinsley’s printed critical text of Burns’s hybrid fash-
ioning of Scots songs an expanded audial archive of
the materials at an earlier stage in their transmis-
sion, before they were confined, not by Kinsley
(whose Clarendon edition is based in many cases
on Burns’s manuscript texts as he sent them to
James Johnson for the Scots Musical Museum), but
by Burns himself in what we must now view as an
act of betrayal or compromise undertaken in regret-
ful compliance with the limitations of the book, not
merely as vehicular but as incarnational form. Such
textual romancing—McGann’s implication that we
have found a remedy for Tanselle’s Platonic lament
over the ‘hazards of the physical’—literalizes the
highly manipulated disjunction between parts and
wholes, the bibliographic resistance that functions
as a trope of otherwise inaccessible textuality and
that underlies romantic literary productivity and
eclectic text editing.
McGann’s argument by example, or detail, and
Tanselle’s argument despite detail are each other’s
obverse: the one founded in the materially resistant
symbolism of linguistic signifiers; the other in the
collusive interactivity of contextual meanings, spe-
cifically the mutual identification of bibliographic
and linguistic codes. But relocated into the electro-
nic environment the descriptive force of McGann’s
influential revisionary approach to textual studies
loses something of its underlying rationale. It is
not immediately obvious that the shift from book-
bound editing to the electronic archiving of text will
enhance our sense of situatedness, of text as locata-
ble event, but this assumption is at least implied in
the drift from new historicism and a socialized posi-
tioning of text to postmodern contextualism of
many of its current advocates, McGann among
them. Accordingly, the computer represents the
most powerful contextualizer we can presently ima-
gine. But the very seductiveness of this manoeuvre,
useful at the level of practicalities (computers can
store and allow retrieval of multiple versions, as
digitized facsimiles, as transcripts, as photographic
images, as representations of diversely principled
and historically situated editions, etc.), is currently
enabling us to ignore just how far the reproduction
of the real is itself a source of disengagement or
dislocation, or at the very least, of relocation
within a technology that possesses its own deter-
mining (but so far largely unexamined) materiality.
The shift may be from a composite witness of mean-
ing to the freer textual play invited through the
electronic manipulation of many witnesses, but at
Text and electronic environment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 107
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
some level this is merely to resituate the old prob-
lem of parts and wholes.
There is something else, too. In a lucid and
ground-clearing essay, ‘Polymorphic, Polysemic,
Protean, Reliable, Electronic Texts’, Peter
Shillingsburg reached two ‘basic conclusions’
about works of literary art that for the purposes of
his argument he couches in negative terms. He
writes: ‘first, a work of art is NOT equivalent with
a linguistic text of it and therefore changes every
time it is embodied in a new medium even
though the linguistic text is copied accurately; and,
second, a work of art is NOT equivalent with a best
version of it but rather is made more accessible in
each of its versions by having alternative versions
presented in conjunction with it’.25 Both proposi-
tions are compelling, and both can serve to legiti-
mate the electronic as the appropriate, even
preferred (in the case of the second proposition)
environment for new scholarly editions.
Particularly important is the reminder that electronic
editions, like their book-bound antecedents, carry
codes other than the purely linguistic, and that
these are meaning-expressive too. Electronic editions
are in themselves newly meaning-expressive and are
not simply a means to access the linguistic work in its
multiple previous expressive forms. The challenge
here is in understanding that representations are
never identical and that they cannot be prioritized
according to their nearness to a pre-representational
(or a previously represented) original.
There is no such possibility as the exact iteration,
the exact reproduction of a text: even facsimiles of
book texts are no more than an illusion of itera-
bility, in their attempt to displace temporality,
to repeat a set of historical configurations.
Considered in terms of the social approach to edit-
ing, facsimiles are the least satisfactory form of
transmission, since their means of production, the
network of transmission in terms of which textual
meaning is deduced, is deliberately obscured
through the intention to present one set of socio-
historical circumstances, one textual event, as
another. (In this sense, the composite or eclectic
text is more honest, in its constitution of a text
that never was.) Stated another way, the question
is whether the descriptive model, validated through
the continuously signifying social process of textual
realization, can itself be modelled either abstractly in
the shape of a theory or performatively as a demon-
stration of social editing which is not itself a new
edition but a reinstantiation of a particular interac-
tion of the linguistic and bibliographical text. It is
tempting to suggest that McGann, recognizing the
impossibility of a theory or rationale of social edit-
ing, is using the storage capacity of the electronic
medium to model a social practice as the antithesis
of theory, as excess rather than abstraction. But not
only are representations of representations not iden-
tical; by McGann’s own argument for the power of
bibliographic codes to reinterpret a stable linguistic
text,26 the symbolic and signifying dimension of the
computer, as physical medium, must resignify the
linguistic and the bibliographic codes by which text
is embodied when that text is imaged or digitized as
part of its reproduction outside print culture. From
her/his plangent relation to the ‘hazards of the phys-
ical’, the traditional eclectic editor might persuade
us that an electronic textbase contains all the docu-
ments for the transmission history of a particular
work, but a socially sensitive textual critic cannot.
For the social critic, to whom the entire field of a
work’s social production is of concern, the appro-
priate first step must be the enquiry into the socio-
historical ground, the ‘determinate circumstances’,
of the electronically constituted text and how those
circumstances refashion meaning. Again, the prob-
lem is one of iterability: in what sense the electronic
environment can represent hypertextually the het-
eroglossia of the textual event, or whether it merely
archives simulations within a musee imaginaire, the
textual equivalent of a theme park. There is some
appeal in viewing the volatility of the electronic
environment as the occasion to evade the determi-
nistic materiality of contexts and instead to experi-
ence ‘realities’ phenomenologically and as a means
to share in their social legitimation. But fundamen-
tal to a social view of representation must remain
representation’s non-iterability, its unavailability
to re-representation as opposed to new representa-
tion. We have yet to see whether our current fasci-
nation for textual romancing will take us into new
fields of textual knowledge or whether, in truly
gothic fashion, we will, with a few rare exceptions,
K. Sutherland
108 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
be content to ghost or hypertrophy the work of its
idealizing other.
5
So, then, what are computers good for? I want to
answer this by raising a problem of representation
and then by countering it with a positive example.
While the electronic edition does instantiate its
own expressive extra-linguistic codes and can, in
some senses, represent the expressive extra-linguistic
codes of print-based and manuscript forms, there is
a kind of bibliographic meaning that resists electro-
nic representation but yet may be considered as
meaning-constitutive. It consists in the meaning
generated through implied aesthetic resistance to
bibliographic form itself, and it inheres in the avail-
ability of the material book as matter; as such it is an
area of meaning inaccessible through the digitized
representation of page on screen or the stored elec-
tronic facsimile.27 Once certain kinds of resistance
are removed, specifically the linguistically informing
principle of resistance to bibliographic form, then a
potentially vital level of meaning is also removed. In
almost all cases, the substitution of one containing
vessel for another liberates new meanings in a lit-
erary work, but it also closes off others. This can
constitute an impoverishment—even an inauthenti-
cation—of meaning. This will be the case for those
romantic works, like The Prelude, where biblio-
graphic resistance is a complexly articulated struc-
turing principle, a condition for hypothesized
wholeness; in such cases bibliographic resistance is
also a condition of meaning at the linguistic level,
for where the physical limitations of text are
removed an area of meaning becomes pointless,
even inaccessible.
Oh, why hath not the mind
Some element to stamp her image on
In nature somewhat nearer to her own?
Why, gifted with such powers to send abroad
Her spirit, must it lodge in shrines so frail?
So complains Wordsworth in the opening lines of
Book 5, entitled ‘Books’, of The Prelude. Expressions
of desire for and proposals for an electronic schol-
arly Prelude are regularly articulated, and on
occasion they draw inspiration from Wordsworth’s
own hypertextual longings quoted above. When in
‘The Rationale of Hypertext’ he declares that the
Prelude volumes of the Cornell Wordsworth have
‘put a period to codex-based scholarly editing’,
McGann is specifically concerned with the editorial
advantages of the electronic environment for the
display of complex variant forms and not with the
potential for liberating the poet’s ideational pro-
cesses.28 The advantages in terms of polytextual pre-
sentation and a complexly searchable assemblage of
multiple versions are clear. It will be possible,
through word and phrase searches across the
many versions, to trace the evolution, at the lexical
level, of bookish resistance even as its meaningful
condition is banished from the texts. But in divor-
cing vehicular from incarnational form we will also
have unpicked the work’s ironic structure, its
informing failure of representation. In keeping
with his socialized view of text McGann tends to
see the computer as storer and representer of bib-
liographic codes, but he is in danger of denying the
book itself its status as bibliographic signifier. For
some scholarly purposes this may be of little con-
cern, but it is a significant failure of representation
within a definition of electronic text as text which
raises to a higher level the expressive potential of
text, what McGann likes to call its status as ‘meta-
book’.29
This example, based on an integrative or syn-
thetic view of representation, is one that must seri-
ously engage the literary scholar: not only what I
here term bibliographic resistance but also biblio-
graphic accommodations (as in the case of the
novel) are integral features of the linguistic meaning
of texts. If, however, we take an analytic view of
representation, things are different. Now each
representation—manuscript, printed, electronic—
performs the function of analytical leverage over,
rather than commentary on, ‘realistic’ representa-
tion: they relate as different definitions of represen-
tation rather than as represented copies, and thus
provide vantage points on text rather than simula-
tions of text objects.
In the electronic environment, the real work of
editing, as the modelling of the relation of a text to
its parts or of a group of texts, has shifted from the
Text and electronic environment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 109
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
literary editor to the electronic encoder. In the elec-
tronic environment, text has to be constructed from
a more fundamental level, and its composition and
decomposition are the subject of more rigorous
debate than need impinge on editorial activity in
book form. Much like the system of analysis
known as bibliographic description, text encoding
is theoretically based and presupposes that there
can be a science of description which operates by
deducing from a range of specific examples and
their necessary variations an inferred standard.
Where a bibliographic description proposes to
investigate and represent scientifically the medium
of transmission, text encoding proposes to represent
text itself. Both are concerned with how to repre-
sent what is absent as present, with how to construe
the book/the text systematically in its absence, by
a methodical comprehension of what it ‘really is’,
through the observation and classification of partic-
ular phenomena. In both cases, it is the very disper-
sion of location, identity, and appearance that is so
significant to the contribution made.30
It is the activity of the text encoder that provides
the most persuasive (because the most powerful)
model for the edition of the electronic era, for it is
the activity of the text encoder that determines how
the text appears and how it can be used. I wonder if
it should worry us that so few literary scholars who
will use and even assemble electronic editions will be
their own encoders or will understand the rigorous
theorizing about what text is that lies behind encod-
ing? ‘The most powerful editions of the electronic
era’, argues Julia Flanders, director of the Brown
University Women Writers Project, will be those
that use ‘text encoding to create models of the
text’s structure’, that use ‘those models to morph
the text, to reorder the words, align them with
other versions, lemmatize them, and so forth’.31
What she envisages is a conceptual shift, towards
an algorithmic expression of textual variance and
relationship, based on the structured search and
analysis of data, far removed from the vague hyper-
textual longing, the quintessential literary condition,
that we mistakenly attempt to literalize in the elec-
tronic medium.32 In this view, the computerized
archive is not so much a repository of full-text
printed variants and manuscript transcriptions, the
musee imaginaire of real presence, as it is the envi-
ronment in which abstract representations can be
generated according to newly determined analytical
procedures. This will require us to revise our per-
spectives on text, to reformulate our theoretic and
representational parameters in favour of a true
metatextuality, distinct from the polytextuality
with which we currently confuse it.
In the romantic articulation of the relation of
parts to wholes, the fragment in declaring its frag-
mentary status brings into cognizance that which is
missing, and co-opts it, in its absence, into the con-
ceptual whole. Through the storage capacity of the
electronic medium, what we conceived of as a con-
ceptual whole is now declared to be no more
than the fragment. Perhaps the next stage will be
for the designers and users of electronic texts to
reformulate the romantic dialectic of incorporation
as part of an understanding of the determining con-
ditions (and limits) for meaning in the electronic
environment. The quantitative model for represen-
tation that Flanders proposes challenges us to con-
ceive the nature and form of the electronic archive
as something other than textual romance, some-
thing more like a return to or oscillation back
towards (for the one is always invoked in the
other), textual idealism or the abstract integrity
(with its capacity to impose rationality on structure)
of the fragment.
Notes
1 This essay was published as ‘Revised Relations?
Material Text, Immaterial Text, and the Electronic
Environment’ in TEXT: An Interdisciplinary Annual
of Textual Studies, 11; 17–39, 1998.
2 Steiner, G. (1989). Real Presences: Is There Anything in
What We Say? London: Faber and Faber, p. 10, 39.
3 Donaldson, P. S. (1997). Digital Archive as Expanded
Text: Shakespeare and Electronic Textuality. In
Sutherland, K. (ed.), Electronic Text: Investigations in
Method and Theory. Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 193;
and McGann, J. J. ‘The Rationale of Hypertext’, in the
same collection, pp. 19–46.
4 See Schlegel, F. (1957). Eichner, H. (ed.), Literary
Notebooks, 1797–1801. London: Athlone Press,
No. 921: ‘even the greatest system is nothing but a
fragment after all’. Compare Paul Hamilton’s reading
of romanticism, in which ‘the collapse of
K. Sutherland
110 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
representation becomes its effective supplement when
it is reread as the symbol of what exceeds representa-
tion. Romantic consciousness can now make the boast
Marx thought defined ideology, that of ‘‘really repre-
senting something without representing something
real’’. Appearance is always sufficient’. The
Romanticism of Contemporary Ideology, in Rajan
T. and Clark D.L. (eds) (1995). Intersections:
Nineteenth-Century Philosophy and Contemporary
Theory. Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, p. 312.
5 Among the most comprehensive recent studies of the
social and cultural significance of the circulation and
possession of goods, and the related ideology of self as
reflection of or resistance to social-fashioning, are the
three thematically connected volumes gathered under
the general title Consumption and Culture in the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, editor-in-chief,
John Brewer (London: Routledge, 1993–95).
6 The phrases remain the same in both 1805 and
1850 versions. The Prelude, Book 12 (1805),
lines 57–59, 205–11; Book 13 (1850), lines 52–54,
206–12.
7 Rousseau, J. -J. (1762). Emile, ou De l’education, Book
5; Ferguson, A. (1767). An Essay on the History of Civil
Society, Fania Oz-Salzberger (ed.) (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 206.
8 Howe, P. P. (ed.) (1930–34). On Modern Comedy. In
The Complete Works of William Hazlitt, 21 Vols.
London: Dent, Vol. 4, p. 12.
9 Coleridge wrote to Joseph Cottle on 4 June 1798, ‘I
meant to have written you an Essay on the
Metaphysics of Typography’. Griggs, E. L. (ed.)
(1956–71). The Collected Letters of Samuel Taylor
Coleridge, 6 Vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, Vol. 1,
p. 142. For the poets’ concern with the typographical
features of Lyrical Ballads, see Boehm, A. D. (1996).
The 1798 Lyrical Ballads and the Poetics of
late Eighteenth-Century Book Production. ELH, 63:
455–7.
10 ‘Preface’ to The Excursion (1814).
11 Foakes, R. A. (ed.) (1987). Lectures 1808-1819; On
Literature, 2 Vols, In The Collected Works of Samuel
Taylor Coleridge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, Vol. 2, p. 60.
12 Greg, W. W. (1950–51) provided the most influential
statement of the position in ‘The Rationale of Copy-
Text’. Studies in Bibliography, 3: 19–36, where he out-
lines the procedures by which the eclectic text is to
be arrived at. Subsequently, and through a long career
(especially in his editorship of Studies in Bibliography)
Fredson Bowers injected a moral scientism into
Greg’s approach; a late statement on eclectic editing
can be found in Bowers, F. (1992). Notes on Theory
and Practice in Editing Texts. In Davison, P. (ed.),
The Book Encompassed: Studies in Twentieth-Century
Bibliography. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 244–57.
13 Eagleton, T. (1996). The Illusions of Postmodernism.
Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 17–18.
14 The point has been made in several accounts of
the postmodern turn in scholarship. See, for example,
Liu, A. (1990). Local Transcendence: Cultural
Criticism, Postmodernism, and the Romanticism of
Detail. Representations, 32: 75–113; and Simpson, D.
(1995). The Academic Postmodern and the Rule of
Literature: A Report on Half-Knowledge. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
15 Referred to in Wu, D. (1991). Editing Intentions.
Essays in Criticism, 41: 3.
16 Leader, Z. (1996). Revision and Romantic
Authorship. Oxford: Clarendon Press, p. 77; see also
Reiman, D. H. (1993). Modern Manuscripts and
Personalist Poetics, Ch. 6 of The Study of Modern
Manuscripts: Public, Confidential, and Private, The
Lyell Lectures in Bibliography, 1989. Baltimore and
London: The Johns Hopkins University Press. The
charge of ‘textual primitivism’ has been levelled at
recent Wordsworth editors by Stillinger, J. (1989).
Textual Primitivism and the Editing of Wordsworth.
Studies in Romanticism, 28: 3–28. Unlike Leader,
however, Stillinger calls for a destabilized editorial
treatment of textual versions whereby ‘early’ or
‘late’ are not mutually exclusive choices but contribu-
tors to a ‘more fluid notion of literary authority’
(p. 27).
17 Spevack, M. (1996–97). The End of Editing
Shakespeare. Connotations, 6(1): 81.
18 Donaldson, P. S. Digital Archive as Expanded Text:
Shakespeare and Electronic Textuality. In Sutherland,
K. (ed.), Electronic Text, p. 181–3, especially: ‘ ‘‘The
text’’, then, can be as capacious as all of its versions
in all media and in all times and places’ (p. 182);
McGann’s ‘Rationale of Hypertext’ relies heavily on
the resistant practices of Blake and Dickinson.
19 James, H. (1909). ‘Preface’ to The American, in The
Novels and Tales of Henry James, New York Edition.
London: Macmillan, Vol. 2, p. xvii.
20 Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and Punish: The Birth
of the Prison. Harmondsworth: Penguin, pp. 139–41,
argues for a history to be written about ‘the detail’;
while Derrida’s obsessive concern [see, for
example, Dissemination (Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 1981)] with the marginal details of
Text and electronic environment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 111
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
text—borders, epigraphs, post-scripta—provides a
revaluation of textual detail that some critics have
argued betrays a level of intellectual irresponsibility.
21 I refer here and in the next few paragraphs to
Graver, B. and Tetreault, R. (1998). Editing Lyrical
Ballads for the Electronic Environment. Romanticism
On the Net, 9. <http://users.ox.ac.uk/scat0385/
electronicLB.html> and to the interactive prototype
pages available at that site.
22 Greetham, D. (1996). Textual Forensics. PMLA,
111: 44.
23 Tanselle, T. G. (1989). A Rationale of Textual
Criticism. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, p. 93.
24 McGann, J. J. The Rationale of Hypertext. In
Sutherland, K. (ed.), Electronic Text. p. 26.
25 Shillingsburg, P. L. (1993). Polymorphic, Polysemic,
Protean, Reliable, Electronic Texts. In Bornstein, G.
and Ralph G. Williams (eds), Palimpsest: Editorial
Theory in the Humanities. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press, p. 35.
26 See McGann, J. (1991). What Is Critical Editing? Text,
5: 15–29, on the textual authority of bibliographic
codes, their impact on meaning even when linguistic
codes remain unchanged, and on ‘the symbolic and
signifying dimensions of the physical medium through
which (or rather as which) the linguistic text is
embodied’. The critical response to McGann’s paper
(and to his implied method) by Howard-Hill, T. H.
Theory and Praxis in the Social Approach to Editing.
Text, 5: 31–46, is also pertinent—in particular,
Howard-Hill’s remark that the distinction between
‘linguistic’ and ‘bibliographical’ codes in McGann’s
argument is ‘not precise’ (p. 34).
27 Cf. Nunberg, G. (1993). The Places of Books in the
Age of Electronic Reproduction. Representations, 42:
15: ‘it is precisely because these [electronic] technolo-
gies transcend the material limitations of the book that
they will have trouble assuming its role’; and 18: ‘A
book doesn’t simply contain the inscription of a text,
it is the inscription.’
28 McGann, J. J. The Rationale of Hypertext. In
Sutherland, K. (ed.), Electronic Text. pp. 37–8.
29 McGann, J. J. The Rationale of Hypertext. In
Sutherland, K. (ed.), Electronic Text. p. 20.
30 Compare Bowers, F. (1949). ‘the purpose of all full
bibliographical description is to allow the reader to
visualize an absent book with some clarity and preci-
sion, and to compare his copy of a book with the ideal
copy as described by the bibliographer’. Principles of
Bibliographical Description (repr. 1994), Winchester: St
Paul’s Bibliographies; and Pichler, A. (1995)
‘Machine-readable texts make it . . . clear to us what
texts are and what text editing means: texts are not
objectively existing entities which just need to be dis-
covered and presented, but entities which have to be
constructed’, ‘Advantages of a Machine-Readable
Version of Wittgenstein’s Nachlass’. In Johannessen,
K. and Nordenstam, T. (eds), Culture and Value:
Philosophy and the Cultural Sciences. Austrian
Ludwig Wittgenstein Society, p. 774.
31 From Flanders, J. (2008). Data and Wisdom:
Electronic Editing and the Quantification of
Knowledge. A paper presented at the ‘Computing
the Edition’ Conference, Toronto, November 1997
and published in this issue (doi:10.1093/llc/fqn036).
32 There were several such analytic textbases in develop-
ment in the 1990s (Peter Robinson’s Chaucer Project,
the University of Bergen’s Wittgenstein Project, for
example), but they shared the field of electronic edi-
torial investigation with the presentational and image-
oriented hypertextual model under construction by
Graver and Tetreault and advocated in McGann’s
‘Rationale of Hypertext’. If the appearance of text
and data in the hypertextual model is more familiar
and ‘friendly’, its demonstrative design is in contra-
diction to the more rigorously conceptual functional-
ity of the analytic edition. It is the designed
abstraction of the latter model which is more likely
to generate a true ‘rationale’ of electronic text.
K. Sutherland
112 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
