
1 Introduction
In practically all scientific fields the task of ensuring
the sustainability of resources, data collections, per-
sonal research journals, and databases is an increas-
ingly important topic—linguistics is no exception
(Dipper et al., 2006; Trilsbeek and Wittenburg,
2006). We report on finished work in a project
that is concerned with providing methods, tools,
best-practice guidelines, and solutions for sustain-
able linguistic resources.1 Our overall goal is to
make sure that a large and heterogeneous set of
Correspondence:
Georg Rehm,
vionto GmbH, Karl-Marx-
Allee 90a, D-10243 Berlin,
Germany
E-mail:
georg.rehm@vionto.com
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
193
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp003 Advance Access Published on 19 March 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
approximately sixty linguistic resources will be
accessible, readable, and processible by interested
parties such as, for example, other researchers
than the ones who originally created said resources,
in 5, 10, or even 20 years time—our method-
of-choice for making sure that these corpora are
available in the coming years is a web-based sustain-
ability platform. The language resources we work
with have been constructed or are still work in pro-
gress in three collaborative research centres
(Sonderforschungsbereiche). The groups in
Tu¨bingen (SFB 441: ‘Linguistic Data Structures’),
Hamburg (SFB 538: ‘Multilingualism’), and
Potsdam/Berlin (SFB 632: ‘Information Structure’)
built a total of 56 resources, corpora, and treebanks
mostly. According to our estimates it took more
than one hundred person years to collect and to
annotate these datasets. To summarize in more gen-
eral terms, our main goal is to enable solutions
that leverage the interoperability, reusability, and
sustainability of a large collection of heterogeneous
language resources.
The agency that funded both our project as
well as the projects who created the linguistic
resources—the German Research Foundation
(DFG)—would like to avoid a situation in which
they have to fund yet another project to (re)create
a dataset for whose creation they already provided
funding in the past, but the existing version is no
longer available, accessible or readable due to, for
example, a proprietary file format, because it has
been locked away in an academic’s hidden vault,
or the person who developed the annotation
scheme can no longer be asked questions concern-
ing specific details of the custom-built format.
The remainder of this article is structured as fol-
lows: first, Section 2 discusses several general aspects
of sustainability, while Section 3 introduces our
approach to normalizing corpus data and metadata
records. The architecture of the sustainability plat-
form we implemented is described in Section 4,
although we are only able to highlight selected
parts of the system due to space restrictions: the
staging area is briefly discussed in Section 4.1,
Section 4.2 describes the back-end of the system,
the web-based graphical interface that includes a
corpus query and visualization front-end is
explained in Section 4.3. The article ends with con-
cluding remarks (Section 5).
2 Linguistic Resources: Aspects
of Sustainability
There are several text and data types that linguists
and other scholars who regularly create or use lan-
guage data work and interact with on a frequent
basis, but the most common, by far, are linguistic
corpora (Garside et al., 1997; Zinsmeister et al.,
2008). In addition to rather simple word lists and
sentence collections, empirical sets of grammatical-
ity judgements, and lexical databases, the linguistic
resources our sustainability project is primarily con-
fronted with are linguistic corpora that contain
either texts or transcribed speech in dozens of lan-
guages. These resources are annotated using multi-
ple, mostly incompatible annotation schemes.
We developed XML-based tools to normalize the
existing resources into a common approach of
representing linguistic data (Wo¨rner et al., 2006;
Witt et al., 2007) and represent knowledge about
the individual annotation schemes used in the ori-
ginal resources with the help of OWL ontologies
(Rehm et al., 2007a).
The goal of providing durable, sustainable lan-
guage corpora is faced with a multitude of chal-
lenges (see the extensive discussion by Bird and
Simons, 2003). In the following, we briefly touch
upon the most important ones:
 Markup languages: language resources which
have been created using proprietary software
tools or annotated based on custom-made,
non-standard annotation schemes need to be
transformed into a data format that can be con-
sidered sustainable and standardized (Wo¨rner
et al., 2006; Witt et al., 2007, 2009; Lehmberg
and Wo¨rner, 2009).
 Metadata encoding: heterogeneous metadata
records across a large set of heterogeneous lan-
guage resources that were created by several
research groups at multiple sites need to be nor-
malized and brought in line with one another so
that these metadata records can be used in a
G. Rehm et al.
194 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
sustainability platform (Burnard and Bauman,
2007; Rehm et al., 2008d).
 Legal aspects: while some of the corpora that we
process belong to the public domain and can
thus be made available without any need for
access regulations, there are other corpora
whose primary data consists of copyrighted
material or highly sensitive data such as
doctor–patient conversations; therefore, we
need to make sure that only those users who
are authorized to view or to download a specific
resource are able to do so (Zimmermann and
Lehmberg, 2007; Lehmberg et al., 2007a,b;
Rehm et al., 2007b,c).
 Corpus querying and metadata search: in order
to enable interested researchers to find and to
evaluate the resources that we prepared, homo-
geneous metadata records as well as a common
data format ensures that metadata and corpus
data can be queried (Rehm et al., 2007a,
2008a,d; Soehn et al., 2008).
As already hinted at in the introduction, our
method of choice for addressing the above-men-
tioned aspects and providing access to the corpora
we processed in the course of our project is a web-
based sustainability platform. First and foremost,
this platform, called SPLICR (Sustainability
Platform for Linguistic Corpora and Resources), is
aimed at researchers who work in linguistics, com-
putational linguistics, and related fields (Rehm
et al., 2008b,c). SPLICR provides a comprehensive
database of metadata records that can be explored
and searched online in order to locate among the set
of processed language resources those that could be
appropriate for one’s specific research needs. In
addition, the system provides a graphical interface
that enables users to query and to visualize corpora.
Resources or specific parts thereof can also be
downloaded.
The main advantage of SPLICR and its under-
lying architecture is that we designed and specified
an integrated workflow that starts with the proces-
sing of individual corpora at multiple sites using
custom-made tools. Afterwards, the processed cor-
pora along with metadata files, their original data
sets, HTML- or PDF-based manuals, and transfor-
mation logfiles are copied onto a server in a
directory tree whose structure is specified by rigid
protocols. In the next step, this directory tree is
traversed using a lightweight importer client that
checks the directory tree for consistency and
copies the corpus files onto the SPLICR server.
3 Data Normalization and
Representation
One of the obstacles we are confronted with is pro-
viding homogeneous means of accessing a large col-
lection of diverse and complex linguistic resources.
For this purpose we developed several custom tools
in order to normalize the corpora (Section 3.1) and
their metadata records (Section 3.2).
3.1 Normalization of linguistic
resources
Language resources are usually built using XML-
based markup languages nowadays (Ide et al.,
2000; Sperberg-McQueen and Burnard, 2002;
Wo¨rner et al., 2006; Lehmberg and Wo¨rner, 2009)
and contain several concurrent annotation layers
that correspond to multiple levels of linguistic
description (e.g. part-of-speech, syntax, corefer-
ence). Our approach includes the normalization of
XML-annotated resources, e.g. for cases in which
corpora use PCDATA content to capture both pri-
mary data (i.e. the original text or transcription) as
well as annotation information (e.g. POS tags). We
use a set of tools to ensure that only primary data is
encoded in PCDATA content and that all annota-
tions proper are encoded using XML elements and
attributes. The transformation from PCDATA con-
tent (i.e. XML elements) to CDATA values (i.e.
XML attributes) is performed semi-automatically
(see Wo¨rner et al., 2006, for details).
Figure 1 illustrates this process by means of an
excerpt from the Tu¨Ba-D/Z treebank (Telljohann
et al., 2004) in one of its four representation formats
(Tusnelda, see Wagner, 2005). Beside the actual pri-
mary data content ‘die AWO’ (the PCDATA con-
tent of the XML element <orth>) other XML
elements such as <pos> use PCDATA content to
encode grammatical information. Since this infor-
mation serves annotation purposes, the contents of
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 195
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
elements that do not contain primary data within
their PCDATA content are transformed to the value
of the attribute genau:text that is introduced by our
tools. As Tusnelda documents comprise several
levels of annotation in a single, monolithic XML
element tree, the overall annotation is still extremely
complex even though we perform a normalization
procedure that includes the step described above.
Therefore, we use additional processing methods
to split the different conceptual levels, e.g. syntax,
morphology, and named entities into multiple
documents, that is, into a multi-rooted tree (Witt
et al., 2007).
Another reason for the normalization
procedure is that both hierarchical and timeline-
based corpora (Bird and Liberman, 2001; Schmidt,
2005) need to be transformed into a common
annotation approach, because we want our users
to be able to query both types of resources at the
same time and in a uniform way (see Fig. 2). Our
approach (Dipper et al., 2006; Schmidt et al., 2006;
Wo¨rner et al., 2006) can be compared to the NITE
Object Model (Carletta et al., 2003): we developed
tools that semiautomatically split hierarchically
annotated corpora that typically consist of a single
XML document instance into individual files, so
that each file represents the information related to
a single annotation layer (Witt et al., 2007; Rehm
et al., 2008d); this approach also guarantees that
overlapping structures can be represented straight-
forwardly. Timeline-based corpora are also pro-
cessed in order to separate graph annotations. This
approach enables us to represent arbitrary types of
XML-annotated corpora as individual files, i.e. indi-
vidual XML element trees. These are encoded as
regular XML document instances, but, as a single
corpus comprises multiple files, there is a need to
go beyond the functionality offered by typical XML
tools to enable us to process multiple files, as regular
tools work with single files only (our approach for
querying multi-rooted trees is described by Rehm
et al., 2007a, 2008a).
The corpora that we process are marked up using
several different markup languages and linguistic tag
sets. As we want to enable users to query multiple
corpora at the same time, we need to provide a
unified view of the markup languages used in the
original resources. For this sustainable operationali-
zation of existing annotation schemes we employ
the ontologies of linguistic annotation (OLiA,
Chiarcos, 2008) approach (see Fig. 2): we built an
OWL DL ontology that serves as a terminological
reference. This reference model is based on the
EAGLES recommendations for morphosyntax, the
<ntNode id="s_1_n_504">
  <tok id="s_1_n_1">
    <orth>die</orth>
    <pos func="-" genau:text="ART"/>
    <desc>
      <morph genau:text="nsf"/>
    </desc>
  </tok>
  <ntNode id="s_1_n_501">
    <tok id="s_1_n_2"> 
      <orth>AWO</orth>
      <posfunc="-" genau:text="NN"/>
      [...]
</ntNode>
<ntNode id="s_1_n_504"> 
  <tok id="s_1_n_1">
    <orth>die</orth>
<pos func="-">ART</pos>
<desc>
      <morph>nsf</morph>
    </desc>
  </tok>
  <ntNode id="s_1_n_501">
    <tok id="s_1_n_2">
      <orth>AWO</orth> 
      <pos func="-">NN</pos>
      <desc> 
        <morph>nsf</morph>
      </desc>
    </tok>
    <ntNodeCat
     func="HD">EN-ADD</ntNodeCat>
  </ntNode>
  <ntNodeCat func="ON">NX 
  </ntNodeCat> 
</ntNode>
Fig. 1 An example from the Tu¨Ba-D/Z treebank (represented in the Tusnelda format) before (left) and after processing
the resource with our normalization tools (right)
G. Rehm et al.
196 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
general ontology for linguistic description (Farrar
and Langendoen, 2003), and the LISA annotation
standard (Dipper et al., 2007). It covers reference
specifications for word classes, and morpho-
syntax, and is currently extended to syntax and
information structure. The OLiA reference model
represents a terminological backbone that different
annotations are linked to and consists of three com-
ponents: a taxonomy of linguistic categories (classes
such as Noun, CommonNoun), a taxonomy of
grammatical features (classes, e.g. Accusative), and
relations (properties, e.g. hasCase). An OLiA anno-
tation model is an ontology that represents one spe-
cific annotation scheme. Rehm et al. (2008a)
describe the integration of the ontology into the
overall querying environment.
Almost all resources that we process are linguistic
corpora and treebanks. In addition, there are a few
resources that belong to different data types. Four
SFB 441 projects construct sentence collections that
consist of, for example, suboptimal syntactic con-
structions taken from the linguistic literature and
annotated with grammaticality judgements, or sen-
tences that have a specific kind of verb phrases such
as the stative passive. Furthermore, multiple projects
create lexicons, some of which are augmented with
empirical judgements gathered in online experi-
ments. In a secondary line of research, we develop
generic XML-based representation formats for these
types of linguistic resources for which we also
implement query and visualization methods to be
used within SPLICR. Our representation format for
lexicons is based on the TEI P5 (Burnard and
Bauman, 2007) guidelines and constructed using
the Roma tool (http://www.tei-c.org/Roma/).
3.2 Normalization of metadata records
The separation of the individual annotation layers
contained in a corpus has serious consequences with
regard to legal issues (Zimmermann and Lehmberg,
2007; Lehmberg et al., 2007a,b, 2008; Rehm et al.,
2007b): due to copyright and personal rights speci-
fics that usually apply to a corpus’ primary data we
provide a fine-grained access control layer to regu-
late access by means of user accounts and access
roles. We have to be able to explicitly specify that
a certain user only has access to the set of, say, six
annotation layers (in this example they might be
available free of charge for research purposes) but
not to the primary data, because the primary data
might be copyright-protected (Rehm et al.,
2007b,c).
Our generic metadata schema, eTEI, is based on
the TEI P4 header (Sperberg-McQueen and
Burnard, 2002) and extended by a set of additional
requirements. Both eTEI records and the corpora
are stored in an XML database. The underlying
assumption is that XML-annotated datasets are
Fig. 2 The two main stages of processing a corpus: constructing an ontology-based formalization of the annotation
model (left) and normalization as well as transformation of the physical corpus annotations into multi-rooted trees
(right)
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 197
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
more sustainable than, for example, data stored in a
proprietary relational database management system.
The main difference between eTEI and other
approaches to representing metadata is that our
generic eTEI metadata schema, currently formalized
as a single document type definition (DTD), can be
applied to five different levels of metadata descrip-
tion (Trippel, 2004; Himmelmann, 2006). A single
eTEI file contains information on one of the follow-
ing levels:
(1) setting (used for recordings or transcripts of
spoken language, describes the situation in
which the speech or conversation took place);
(2) raw data (e.g. a book, a piece of paper, an audio
or video recording of a dialogue etc.);
(3) primary data (transcribed speech, digital texts
etc.);
(4) annotations;
(5) a corpus (consists of primary data augmented
by one or more annotation levels).
The pressing need for these five levels of meta-
data description can be illustrated using the ambi-
guity of the ‘author’ concept: while setting refers to a
specific communication situation, the author of raw
data can be the author of a certain book or the
speaker whose monologue has been recorded. The
author of primary data is the person who tran-
scribed the raw data into one or more digital files.
The authors of individual annotation files are those
who analyse, interpret, and annotate the primary
data (usually linguists, student assistants, or PhD
students) with the help of specialized tools and the
author of the corpus is the person who is responsible
for constructing or collecting the corpus data (for
example, the principal investigator of a research
project). Important and relevant metadata exist on
all five levels and can be captured using the eTEI
approach.
We devised a workflow that helps users edit eTEI
records (Rehm et al., 2008d). Its primary compo-
nents are the eTEI DTD and the oXygen XML
editor. Based on annotations contained in the
DTD we can generate automatically an empty
XML document with embedded documentation
and a Schematron schema. The Schematron speci-
fication can be used to check whether all elements
and attributes instantiated in an eTEI document
conform to the current level of metadata
description.
4 The Sustainability Platform
SPLICR
The sustainability platform consists of a front-end
and a back-end. The front-end is the user visible
part and is realized using JSP (Java Server Pages),
JavaScript, and Ajax technologies. It runs in the
user’s browser and provides functions for searching
and exploring metadata records and corpus data.
The back-end is a web application that runs on
top of the Tomcat application server.
In the following, we describe SPLICR’s staging
area and general architecture (Section 4.1) as
well as its back-end (Section 4.2) and front-end
(Section 4.3).
4.1 The staging area
SPLICR is the result of a joint project between the
universities of Hamburg, Potsdam/Berlin, and
Tu¨bingen. While the system is primarily developed
in Tu¨bingen, it is meant to be used to import and
make available corpora and additional resources
from all different sites. For this reason we put spe-
cial emphasis on making sure that all corpora from
all sites can be imported into the platform and that
the distributed research staff can carry out these
procedures on their own.
First, all corpora and metadata are manipulated
according to the processing steps described in
Section 3 (see the lower part in Fig. 3). This also
includes the creation of a manifest file for each
corpus. They are represented in a simple XML
format and act as a corpus inventory list that also
contains a name and short description of a resource.
Manifest files are generated semi-automatically by
the normalization tools, their contents are used by
the front-end and by the import and export tools.
Each corpus consists of five parts: the manifest file,
multiple files that contain the processed corpus
data, multiple files that contain the eTEI metadata
records, the original and unchanged corpus
files (including the original metadata files,
G. Rehm et al.
198 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
documentation, etc.), and stylesheets as well as log-
files that were used for or generated by the corpus
transformation phase. Then, each site prepares a
local directory tree that houses all corpus directories
and files. The structure of this directory tree (see
Fig. 4) as well as strict naming conventions for files
and folders are defined by a shared technical specifi-
cation so that the tree can be traversed and processed
automatically. Afterwards, the three local directory
trees are copied into the staging area, stored on our
central project server which is located in Tu¨bingen
(see the middle part in Fig. 3). From here we use an
importer tool to traverse the staging area fully auto-
matically. The importer tool checks, among others,
the data for consistency and imports the corpus data
and metadata records into the back-end.
Fig. 3 Resource normalization, the staging area, and the primary SPLICR components
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 199
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4.2 The back-end
The back-end hosts the JSP files and related data.
It accesses two different databases, the corpus
database and the system database. Furthermore,
we implemented a file vault that stores additional
files that belong to a specific corpus, such as the
original corpus data files, PDF files that act as doc-
umentation, and transformation scripts, among
others. Several servlets provide means for exchan-
ging information between the front-end and the
back-end. The back-end is implemented as a web
application that runs on top of Apache’s Tomcat
servlet container.
Fig. 4 The strictly specified directory structure of the staging area (excerpt)
G. Rehm et al.
200 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The corpus database is an eXist XML database,
extended by the AnnoLab system (Eckart and Teich,
2007), in which all XML-encoded resources and
metadata are stored. The back-end communicates
with the corpus database using the XML:DB inter-
face. The XML files that we processed (see Section
3.1) and that belong to a single annotation layer of a
specific corpus are stored in a single collection. For
the system database we use a relational database
(MySQL) that contains data about user accounts
and acts as a catalogue for corpus data. It stores
information about single files in a corpus, resource
groups (i.e. corpora), and access rights. A specific
user can only access a specific resource if the per-
missions for this user/resource pair allow this opera-
tion. The file vault stores all additional resources
(i.e. original corpus files, etc.) in regular files in a
directory used by SPLICR exclusively. The corpus
database and the file vault are regarded as a single
component in the back-end and are accessed using a
unified vault interface. Depending on their type,
resources are transparently stored either in the
corpus database or in the file vault. All operations
that access these resources are carried out through
this interface, so other back-end components do not
need to communicate with either the corpus data-
base or the file vault explicitly.
The import service servlet is the remote end-
point for the importer client (see Section 4.1). The
import tool processes the staging area and sends
each resource to the import service in a file-by-file
fashion. Depending on the URI used and the HTTP
headers set, the type of each file is determined and
the appropriate records in the system database are
created. Furthermore, files are stored in the appro-
priate location using the vault interface. The query
service component is responsible for the asynchro-
nous processing of corpus queries. A query is car-
ried out in the following way: the front-end sends a
JSON representation of the query and a list of the
corpora currently selected by the user to the query
dispatcher servlet. The servlet transforms the query
into XQuery by generating, for every single file of all
selected corpora, a dedicated XQuery expression. If
the user does not have the permissions to access a
certain file, it will be skipped. This set of XQuery
expressions is linked to a query job which is
executed using a worker-thread of the query service
component. At the same time, a unique query ID is
returned to the front-end, which will start polling
results. The XQuery expressions are run sequentially
against the corpus database. Results are buffered
within the back-end until the front-end fetches
them. This approach enables us to provide a much
better user experience, since the user can already
start exploring the first result even though the
system is still running queries on the remaining
files (see the progress bar at the bottom of the brow-
ser in Figs 9–11). A query monitor exists in the
administration area of the front-end. It allows the
administrator to display all currently running query
jobs with additional details such as average query
runtime per file and estimated remaining total run-
time. Furthermore, the administrator can cancel
query jobs. Corpus data is delivered either using
the get service or transformation service servlets. If
the user has access to a file, the get service servlet
fetches the resource from the vault and sends it
to the browser (we need this function for
providing corpus download links in the front-
end). The transformation service servlet applies an
XSLT transformation to a specific file before it sends
the result to the browser. Currently, this servlet
is used for the HTML visualization of the eTEI
metadata records.
4.3 The front-end
The target user group of our system consists of
researchers who work in linguistics, computational
linguistics, and related fields. SPLICR needs to be
able to support its users answering the following
questions (see Fig. 5): Which linguistic resources
are stored in the platform? Can one or more of
these corpora be used as empirical data bases for a
specific research question one is working on? What
is the extent of the annotations of these resources
and do they cover what is needed for one’s research
endeavour? We meet this intended usage scenario
with the following areas of functionality: metadata
exploration (Section 4.3.1), multiple methods of
querying corpora (Section 4.3.2), as well as corpus
download (Section 4.3.3).
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 201
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4.3.1 Metadata exploration
As soon as a user logs onto the system he or she is
presented with the complete list of resources cur-
rently stored in SPLICR (see Fig. 6).2 Drop-down
menus can be used to filter the list, for example, to
restrict the view to the corpora from a specific orga-
nization or to those that contain a specific level of
linguistic description. A click on the ‘information’
Fig. 5 One typical usage scenario of the sustainability platform SPLICR
Fig. 6 The SPLICR front-end: a list of the available corpora and resources
G. Rehm et al.
202 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
icon expands the row that contains the name of the
resource and its affiliation. This expanded view
shows a brief description of the corpus, its version,
the annotation layers, and the number of files asso-
ciated with this resource. If the user wants to know
more, the hyperlink ‘contents and download’
switches to a view that lists all files that belong to
a corpus. From here, the eTEI-encoded XML meta-
data files can be displayed by automatically trans-
forming them to XHTML (see Section 4.3.3).
4.3.2 Multiple methods of querying corpora
As we cannot expect our target users (i.e. linguists)
to be proficient in XML query languages such as
XPath and XQuery, we provide an intuitive query
interface that generalizes from the underlying data
structures and querying methods actually used.
Before we started implementing SPLICR we col-
lected a set of requirements and functions that the
front-end should have by conducting in-depth
interviews with the staff members of SFB 441 and
by asking them to fill out a questionnaire (Soehn
et al., 2008). The feedback we received to this ques-
tionnaire and during the interviews was structured
and compiled into a set of features that we docu-
mented in a requirements document.
As soon as one or more corpora are selected in
the list of resources by clicking the star icon or using
the ‘select’ hyperlink (see Fig. 6), the user can access
the query interface which is based on two main
concepts. First, we provide three different kinds of
search widgets (in increasing order of complexity:
full-text search, concept search, tree fragment
search). Second, the query interface supports multi-
ple tabs that can be added and deleted at will. The
idea behind this approach is that a complex search
query can be constructed using arbitrary search wid-
gets in multiple tabs. In reality, however, SPLICR
currently only supports multiple tabs for the con-
cept search query widget; to enable complex queries,
these multiple tabs can be combined using ‘ ’ and
‘ ’ icons in a flexible way (not shown in any of the
screenshots).
Query Widget: Full-Text Search. The full-text
search query widget can be used to find certain
words or simple patterns in corpora. Matches are
highlighted in the result browser.
Query Widget: Concept Search. The concept
search query widget presents a list of linguistic con-
cepts that are contained in the individual annota-
tion layers that make up a corpus (see Fig. 7). For
example, if the user selects a certain corpus, the
annotation layer to be queried needs to be selected
from the floating ‘Query Type & Layer’ window
(‘Grammatical Function’ in Fig. 7). As soon as
one such layer is picked, the front-end presents
the list of linguistic concepts that are encoded in
this layer.3 When the user selects one of these con-
cepts, a second drop-down menu with a list of dis-
tinct values for this concept is dynamically filled.
Finally, the user can select the context in which
the matches are to be displayed. Depending on the
selected corpus and annotation layer, the context
can be ‘words’ only, ‘phrases’, ‘sentences’, ‘para-
graphs’ or ‘articles’.
Concept search is a very simple and user-friendly
method of getting to know the actual annotations
contained in a specific corpus. This querying mode
is based on XML-encoded configuration files that
represent the list of concepts, their values as well
as a small set of corpus-specific return contexts.
The respective set of information is represented as
XPath fragments. At query time these fragments are
combined into an XQuery expression that is evalu-
ated against the XML database in which all corpora
and resources are stored (see Fig. 3).
Query Widget: Tree-Fragment Search. The
most sophisticated query widget is a fully-fledged
interactive editor for constructing linguistic tree
fragments that can be queried against the currently
selected corpus (Rehm et al., 2008a). The structures
defined by these graphs mirror the structures to be
found; in Fig. 8 a query is constructed in which
nodes of the phrase type NX (noun phrase) dom-
inate nodes of the phrase type ADJX (adjective
phrase).4 The user can choose among several func-
tions in order to build a tree in a step-by-step fash-
ion. First, one or more node icons can be
picked from the tool bar and placed on the
assembly pane using drag and drop. Then, the
user can connect these nodes with edges that repre-
sent dominance or precedence. In addition, one or
more sets of attribute-value-pairs can be placed
inside nodes in order to specify even more detailed
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 203
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 7 The SPLICR front-end: the query mode ‘concept search’
Fig. 8 The SPLICR front-end: the ‘tree editor’ query mode
G. Rehm et al.
204 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
constraints a node has to satisfy. For these con-
straints, the concept search configuration files
(see the previous paragraph) are re-used so that
the user is not expected to have intimate knowledge
of the annotation scheme employed in the original
corpus. The current state of the tree editor can
be roughly compared to TIGERSearch’s feature
set (Lezius, 2002) enhanced by our specific
requirements.
The tree editor is fully implemented in JavaScript
extended by the frameworks Prototype and script.a-
culo.us. The editor communicates with the back-
end via Ajax by posting XQuery requests to a servlet
that runs on the back-end. The servlet responds
with the XML-encoded matches, which are then
interpreted by a variety of display modules (see
below).
The Result Browser. We provide three different
query widgets that can be used to search and query
corpora. The results of these queries are visualized
by the result browser that offers four different dis-
play modes: plain text view, XML view (see Fig. 9),
box view (see Fig.10), and tree view (see Fig. 11).
While plain text view and XML view are self-expla-
natory, the box viewer is especially useful for visua-
lizing transcribed speech data; additional
information is presented in pop-up windows. The
tree viewer was fully implemented in JavaScript and
visualizes the tree structure of the XML document
that was returned as a match by the XML database.
The user can zoom in and out, attribute informa-
tion can be displayed or hidden, and edges can be
displayed in two different styles.
4.3.3 Corpus download
The corpus download facility is included in the view
that displays the contents of a corpus (see Fig. 12).
The contents are grouped into the sections ‘pro-
cessed data’, ‘metadata’, ‘original data’, and ‘trans-
formation data’ (see Section 4.1). These different
sections can be further expanded in order to display
the actual files that belong to a section. For the
processed data area, an additional section is intro-
duced, i.e. the annotation layers that are listed
beneath the group of processed files (again, see
Fig. 12). Should the user decide that he or she
Fig. 9 The SPLICR front-end: result browser in ‘XML viewer’ mode
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 205
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Fig. 10 The SPLICR front-end: result browser in ‘box viewer’ mode
Fig. 11 The SPLICR front-end: result browser in ‘tree viewer’ mode
G. Rehm et al.
206 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
wants to work with a certain corpus outside of the
platform using his or her own set of tools, the indi-
vidual parts of a corpus can be downloaded as ZIP
files by clicking on the disk icons. Furthermore,
single files can also be downloaded by clicking the
hyperlink ‘source file’.
5 Concluding Remarks
The interoperability, reusability, and sustainability
of electronic texts, multimodal data, and other digi-
tal resources is a crucial issue for all branches within
Digital Humanities. Several initiatives have been
launched—especially in the USA and in Europe—
to address this topic, and the project ‘Sustainability
of Linguistic Resources’, funded by the German
Research Foundation (DFG), can be seen as one
example of these recent developments. This article
presents a practical result of this linguistic project,
the sustainability platform SPLICR, a system that
allows one to examine, query, and download
linguistic data sets. Although linguistic resources
are special, most importantly because of the depth
and complexity of their annotations, they are first
and foremost a type of digital resource within
the humanities. This is why we are convinced that
other initiatives can benefit from our solutions to
the problems we encountered in the course of this
project.
The aspect of data normalization is rarely dis-
cussed in academic publications. This is mostly
due to the fact that the conversion from one
format into another is not regarded as a difficult
or challenging task, because tools and specialized
programming languages exist that support research-
ers in converting data sets from one format into
another. In practice, however, it turns out that
this rather time-consuming task is in fact of interest
for researchers within Digital Humanities. The
reason is that the specification of transformations
may change the model according to which a text
resource is annotated. Analogously to our experi-
ences in dealing with data conversion, practical
Fig. 12 The SPLICR front-end: corpus contents and download mode
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 207
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
work with heterogeneous linguistic resources
revealed new insights for our work with metadata.
While metadata for text resources is a topic that has
been extensively discussed within Digital
Humanities and, especially, in library science for
decades, we had to devote a significant amount of
effort to finding an appropriate solution for the task
of representing metadata for normalized corpora.
Our approach is based on the specification of meta-
data within the TEI framework but extends its
methodology by specifying TEI headers for different
components or layers of a linguistic resource. As a
result, the metadata of a resource included in the
sustainability platform are split over several header
files, each of which deals with different aspects or
components of the data that it describes, e.g. the
setting describes a real-world situation the language
resource is related to, whereas metadata for annota-
tions describe, e.g. the names of the annotators or
the name and version of the annotation software
and the date and time at which the annotation
was produced.
The detailed description of SPLICR, the sustain-
ability platform for linguistic resources, can also be
of relevance to other fields apart from linguistics. To
give only one example, in order to store and main-
tain the more than fifty resources in the staging area,
we developed a specification that contains, among
others, strict naming conventions and a carefully
designed directory tree. The automatic import of
resources into a staging area that includes multiple
consistency checks is an approach that we recom-
mend to all projects that build large repositories of
digital resources. To sum up, we are convinced that
the results of this large linguistic project will not
only help linguists dealing with digital resources
but also researchers from other domains in the
Digital Humanities.
References
Bird, S. and Liberman, M. (2001). A formal framework
for linguistic annotation. Speech Communication,
33(1/2): 23–60.
Bird, S. and Simons, G. (2003). Seven dimensions of
portability for language documentation and descrip-
tion. Language, 79: 557–82.
Burnard, L. and Bauman, S. (eds) (2007). TEI P5:
Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
Interchange. Text Encoding Initiative Consortium
http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/html/ (last
accessed on 6 March 2009).
Carletta, J., Kilgour, J., O’Donnell, T. J., Evert, S., and
Voormann, H. (2003). The NITE Object Model Library
for Handling Structured Linguistic Annotation on
Multimodal Data Sets, Proceedings of the EACL
Workshop on Language Technology and the Semantic
Web (3rd Workshop on NLP and XML) Budapest.
Chiarcos, C. (2008). An ontology of linguistic annota-
tions’. LDV Forum, 23(1): 1–16.
Dipper, S., Go¨tze, M., and Skopeteas, S. (eds) (2007).
Information Structure in Cross-Linguistic Corpora:
Annotation Guidelines for Phonology, Morphology,
Syntax, Semantics, and Information Structure,
ISIS-Working Papers of the SFB 632 vol. 7. Potsdam.
Dipper, S., Hinrichs, E., Schmidt, T., Wagner, A., and
Witt, A. (2006). Sustainability of Linguistic Resources. In
Hinrichs, E., Ide, N., Palmer, M., and Pustejovsky, J.
(eds), Proceedings of the LREC 2006 Satellite Workshop
Merging and Layering Linguistic Information, Genoa,
Italy, 48–54.
Eckart, R. and Teich, E. (2007). An XML-Based Data
Model for Flexible Representation and Query of
Linguistically Interpreted Corpora. In Rehm, G.,
Witt, A., and Lemnitzer, L. (eds), Datenstrukturen fu¨r
linguistische Ressourcen und ihre Anwendungen – Data
Structures for Linguistic Resources and Applications:
Proceedings of the Biennial GLDV Conference 2007.
Tu¨bingen: Gunter Narr, pp. 327–36.
Farrar, S. and Langendoen, T. (2003). A linguistic ontol-
ogy for the semantic web. GLOT International, 3:
97–100.
Garside, R., Leech, G., & McEnery, A. (eds) (1997).
Corpus Annotation – Linguistic Information from
Computer Text Corpora. London, New York: Longman.
Himmelmann, N. P. (2006). Daten und Datenhuberei.
Keynote speech, 28th annual meeting of the DGfS,
University of Bielefeld.
Ide, N., Bonhomme, P., and Romary, L. (2000). XCES:
An XML-based Standard for Linguistic Corpora,
Proceedings of the Second Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC), Athens, pp. 825–30.
Lehmberg, T., Chiarcos, C., Hinrichs, E., Rehm, G., and
Witt, A. (2007a). Collecting Legally Relevant Metadata
by Means of a Decision-Tree-Based Questionnaire
System. In Schmidt, S., Siemens, R., Kumar, A., and
G. Rehm et al.
208 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Unsworth, J. (eds), Digital Humanities 2007. ACH,
ALLC, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA: Graduate School
of Library and Information Science, University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, pp. 164–6.
Lehmberg, T., Chiarcos, C., Rehm, G., and Witt, A.
(2007b). Rechtsfragen bei der Nutzung und Weitergabe
linguistischer Daten. In Rehm, G., Witt, A., and
Lemnitzer, L. (eds), Datenstrukturen fu¨r linguistische
Ressourcen und ihre Anwendungen—Data Structures
for Linguistic Resources and Applications: Proceedings of
the Biennial GLDV Conference 2007. Tu¨bingen: Gunter
Narr, pp. 93–102.
Lehmberg, T., Rehm, G., Witt, A., and Zimmermann, F.
(2008). Digital text collections, linguistic research data,
and mashups: notes on the legal situation. Library
Trends, 57(1): 52–71.
Lehmberg, T. and Wo¨rner, K. (2009) Annotation
Standards. In Lu¨deling, A. and Kyto¨, M. (eds), Corpus
Linguistics. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter, Handbu¨cher
zur Sprach- und Kommunikationswissenschaft (HSK).
Lezius, W. (2002). Ein Suchwerkzeug fu¨r syntaktisch anno-
tierte Textkorpora. Ph.D. thesis, University of Stuttgart.
Arbeitspapiere des Instituts fu¨r Maschinelle
Sprachverarbeitung, vol. 8, No. 4.
Rehm, G., Eckart, R., and Chiarcos, C. (2007a). An
OWL- and XQuery-based Mechanism for the
Retrieval of Linguistic Patterns from XML-Corpora.
In Angelova, G., Bontcheva, K., Mitkov, R.,
Nicolov, N., and Nikolov, N. (eds), International
Conference Recent Advances in Natural Language
Processing (RANLP 2007). Borovets, Bulgaria, 510–514.
Rehm, G., Eckart, R., Chiarcos, C., and Dellert, J.
(2008a). Ontology-Based XQuery’ing of XML-Encoded
Language Resources on Multiple Annotation Layers,
Proceedings of the 6th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC 2008), Marrakech,
Morocco.
Rehm, G., Schonefeld, O., Witt, A., Chiarcos, C., and
Lehmberg, T. (2008b). A web-platform for preserving,
exploring, visualising and querying linguistic corpora
and other resources. Procesamiento del Lenguaje
Natural, 41:155–162. (Proceedings of SEPLN 2008 –
24th edition of the Conference of the Spanish Society
for Natural Language Processing, 10–12 September,
Madrid).
Rehm, G., Schonefeld, O., Witt, A., Chiarcos, C., and
Lehmberg, T. (2008c). SPLICR: A Sustainability
Platform for Linguistic Corpora and Resources. In
Storrer, A., Geyken, A., Siebert, A., and
Wu¨rzner, K.-M. (eds), KONVENS 2008 (Konferenz
zur Verarbeitung natu¨rlicher Sprache) – Textressourcen
und lexikalisches Wissen, Berlin, pp. 86–95.
Rehm, G., Schonefeld, O., Witt, A., Lehmberg, T.,
Chiarcos, C., Bechara, H., Eishold, F., Evang, K.,
Leshtanska, M., Savkov, A., and Stark, M. (2008d).
The Metadata-Database of a Next Generation
Sustainability Web-Platform for Language Resources,
Proceedings of the 6th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC 2008), Marrakech,
Morocco.
Rehm, G., Witt, A., Zinsmeister, H., and Dellert, J.
(2007b) Corpus Masking: Legally Bypassing Licensing
Restrictions for the Free Distribution of Text
Collections. In Schmidt, S., Siemens, R., Kumar, A.,
and Unsworth, J. (eds), Digital Humanities 2007.
ACH, ALLC, Urbana-Champaign, IL, USA: Graduate
School of Library and Information Science, University
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, pp. 166–70.
Rehm, G., Witt, A., Zinsmeister, H., and Dellert, J.
(2007c). Masking Treebanks for the Free Distribution of
Linguistic Resources and Other Applications, Proceedings
of the Sixth International Workshop on Treebanks and
Linguistic Theories (TLT 2007), Bergen, Norway,
number 1 in Northern European Association for
Language Technology Proceedings Series, pp. 127–38.
Schmidt, T. (2005). Time Based Data Models and the Text
Encoding Initiative’s Guidelines for Transcription of
Speech. Working Papers in Multilingualism, Series B 62.
Schmidt, T., Chiarcos, C., Lehmberg, T., Rehm, G.,
Witt, A., and Hinrichs, E. (2006). Avoiding Data
Graveyards: From Heterogeneous Data Collected in
Multiple Research Projects to Sustainable Linguistic
Resources, Proceedings of the E-MELD 2006 Workshop
on Digital Language Documentation: Tools and
Standards—The State of the Art, East Lansing,
Michigan.
Soehn, J.-P., Zinsmeister, H., and Rehm, G. (2008).
Requirements of a User-friendly, General-purpose
Corpus Query Interface. In Burnard, L., Choukri, K.,
Rehm, G., Schmidt, T., and Witt, A. (eds),
Proceedings of the LREC 2008 Workshop Sustainability
of Language Resources and Tools for Natural Language
Processing, Marrakech, Morocco.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M., and Burnard, L. (eds)
(2002). TEI P4: Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding
and Interchange. Oxford, Providence, Charlottesville,
Bergen: Text Encoding Initiative Consortium. XML
Version.
Telljohann, H., Hinrichs, E., and Ku¨bler, S. (2004) The
Tu¨Ba-D/Z Treebank—Annotating German with a
Sustainability of annotated resources in linguistics
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 209
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Context-Free Backbone, Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2004), Lisbon, Portugal.
Trilsbeek, P. and Wittenburg, P. (2006). Archiving
Challenges. In Gippert, J., Himmelmann, N. P., and
Mosel, U. (eds), Essentials of Language
Documentation. Berlin, New York: Mouton de
Gruyter, pp. 311–35.
Trippel, T. (2004). Metadata for Time Aligned Corpora,
Proceedings of the LREC Workshop: A Registry of
Linguistic Data Categories within an Integrated
Language Repository Area, Lisbon.
Wagner, A. (2005). Unity in Diversity: Integrating
Differing Linguistic Data in TUSNELDA. In
Dipper, S., Go¨tze, M., and Stede, M. (eds),
Heterogeneity in Focus: Creating and Using Linguistic
Databases. Potsdam, vol. 2 of ISIS (Interdisciplinary
Studies on Information Structure), Working Papers of
the SFB 632, pp.1–20.
Witt, A., Rehm, G., Hinrichs, E., Lehmberg, T., and
Stegmann, J. (2009) SusTEInability of linguistic
resources through feature structures. Literary and
Linguistic Computing.
Witt, A., Schonefeld, O., Rehm, G., Khoo, J., and Evang,
K. (2007). On the Lossless Transformation of Single-File,
Multi-Layer Annotations into Multi-rooted Trees.
In Usdin, B. T. (ed), Proceedings of Extreme Markup
Languages 2007, Montre´al, Canada.
Wo¨rner, K., Witt, A., Rehm, G., and Dipper, S. (2006).
Modelling Linguistic Data Structures. In Usdin, B. T.
(ed), Proceedings of Extreme Markup Languages 2006,
Montre´al, Canada.
Zimmermann, F. and Lehmberg, T. (2007). Language
Corpora—Copyright—Data Protection: The Legal
Point of View. In Schmidt, S., Siemens, R.,
Kumar, A., and Unsworth, J. (eds), Digital
Humanities 2007. ACH, ALLC, Urbana-Champaign,
IL, USA: Graduate School of Library and Information
Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
pp. 162–4.
Zinsmeister, H., Ku¨bler, S., Hinrichs, E., and Witt, A.
(2008). Linguistically Annotated Corpora: Quality
Assurance, Reusability and Sustainability. In
Lu¨deling, A. and Kyto¨, M. (eds), Corpus Linguistics.
Berlin, etc.: de Gruyter, HSK.
Notes
1 The authors would like to thank Christian Chiarcos
(University of Potsdam) and Timm Lehmberg
(University of Hamburg) for their work and commit-
ment at the two remote project sites in Potsdam and
Hamburg. Furthermore, we would like to thank
Johannes Dellert, Kilian Evang, Magdalena
Leshtanska, and Aleksandar Savkov (University of
Tu¨bingen) for taking care of extensive corpus data con-
versions and implementing part of the software
described in this article. Finally, we would like to
thank Richard Eckart (TU Darmstadt) for providing
AnnoLab and supporting us in the integration of the
software into our sustainability platform called
SPLICR.
2 The screenshots shown in Figs 6–12 were made using a
SPLICR installation that we set up for demonstration
purposes; it does not comprise the complete list of
corpora that we processed in the context of the project.
3 The value for the concept ‘Part of Speech’ shown in Fig.
7, ‘$,’, is used to annotate a comma in the treebank
Tu¨Ba-D/Z (see the annotation guidelines for this
resource available at http://www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/
en_tuebadz.shtml). Other, probably more intuitive
examples are ‘adv’, ‘art’, and ‘vvfin’.
4 Figures 9–11, show some of the results this query pro-
duced with regard to the treebank Tu¨Ba-D/Z (see
Section 3.1).
G. Rehm et al.
210 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
