TEI and cultural heritage
ontologies: Exchange of
information?
............................................................................................................................................................
Christian-Emil Ore and Øyvind Eide
ILN/EDD, University of Oslo, PO Box 1123, Blindern, NO-0317
Oslo, Norway
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
The content in information systems and virtual reconstructions in the cultural
heritage sector is to a large degree directly based on information deduced from
the study of texts. In many cases, even if the texts are available electronically, the
links from the deduced facts to the original texts are not available and in many
cases very costly to re-establish. Reproducibility of results is a core concept in
text-based research as in all research. Thus, such links should be expressed expli-
citly in the systems and in accordance with the data standards developed in the
fields of text encoding and conceptual modelling. To do this it is necessary to
create a combined understanding of text encoding represented by the TEI guide-
lines and the understanding of conceptual models represented by initiatives like
the CIDOC CRM and FRBRoo. In this article, we study a part of this complex by
comparing the expressive power of the real world descriptions TEI P5 by map-
ping central parts of the CIDOC CRM onto TEI P5. It is clear that the TEI P5 has
moved a great step in the direction towards an event-oriented model compared
with TEI P4. Our use of CIDOC CRM as a yardstick shows that the expressive-
ness of TEI P5 can be greatly improved by extending the scope of very restricted
elements like the relation element and adding a few new elements to the TEI.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
Since the mid-1990s there has been an increase in
the interest for the design and use of conceptual
models (ontologies) in library science as well as in
humanities computing. In text-oriented humanities
computing, however, conceptual models and ontol-
ogies seem to be more connected to database devel-
opment than to text research.
Reproducibility of results is a core concept in
text-based research as in all research. The content
in information systems and virtual reconstructions
in the cultural heritage sector are to a large degree
directly based on information deduced from text
studies. In many cases the links from the informa-
tion system back to the text are not available, and
they may be complicated to re-establish. Even if it is
possible to re-establish them, the process may be too
expensive. These links are necessary to enable repro-
ducibility of the deduction, since they document
how the conclusions are based on the texts.
How should structured information, based on a
reading of a text, be linked to the encoded text itself?
It is important to base such linking on data stan-
dards evolved in the fields of text encoding and
conceptual modelling. Thus, the understanding
Correspondence:
Dr Christian-Emil Ore, ILN/
EDD, University of Oslo,
PO Box 1123, Blindern,
NO-0317 Oslo, Norway.
E-mail:
c.e.s.ore@edd.uio.no
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
161
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp010
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of text encoding represented by the TEI guidelines
and the understanding of conceptual models repre-
sented by initiatives like the CIDOC CRM and
FRBRoo should be combined.
The term ontology means literally the study of
being and was until recently the name of a branch
of philosophy and a term used in the singular only.
During the last ten years the term has been adopted
by computer and information sciences and the
scope of the term has been expanded significantly.
Today, it may denote everything from data models
to classification systems and explanatory models in
natural sciences. In this article we use ontology in the
meaning conceptual model. That is, a formally
defined model resulting from an analysis of a spe-
cific domain and not necessarily a data model in the
computer science sense.
2 Archaeology, Information
Extraction and Encoding of Texts
The discussion in this article is based on our work
with archaeological collections and so-called grey
literature in the Norwegian University Museums,
as well as with other electronic text collections
established in the two large digitization projects,
The Documentation Project (1992–1997) and the
Museum Project (1998–2006).
Archaeologists have been using computer-based
methods since the 1960s. Over the years, computer
applications in archaeology have primarily been
used for statistical analysis as well as to create inven-
tory databases. Pattern recognition and simulation/
AI were at their peaks around 1980 and 1990,
respectively. In the 1990s GIS, 3D modelling and
the Web were in focus (Scollar, 1999). Most appli-
cations were designed to analyse information col-
lected during fieldwork.
Like other scholars, archaeologists use texts, but
text philology as such is not central to their disci-
pline. They tend to have a simpler view of texts than
the scholars researching texts per se. As a result of
this, the task of creating a database on the basis of
old reports is normally done through reading the
text and keying into a database form the informa-
tion considered to be essential in a normalized form.
This method is fast, but the link to the original text
is lost. Thus it is virtually impossible to check the
correctness of the data at a later point in time and
too costly to repeat the process with another focus.
A major part of the Norwegian Documentation/
Museum Project was to create an information
system for the archaeological museums in Norway.
For almost 170 years the archaeological museums in
Norway have published information on a yearly
basis on their acquired artefacts in specially pre-
pared acquisition catalogues. The description of
finds in these catalogues are quite longwinded,
including extensive information on the finds, the
find contexts, its place and time, the finder or exca-
vator, as well as detailed descriptions and classifica-
tions. The series of catalogues served for practical
purposes as the main inventory for each museum.
In general, old reports, catalogues and grey docu-
ments form the most important source of informa-
tion about the museum collections. They also
document the work of scholars in the field as well
as in the museums. To be able to use the informa-
tion available in these texts in an information
system while keeping the integrity of the original
texts, we used SGML/XML encoding as an inter-
mediate step in the conversion process, see
(Holmen and Uleberg, 1996) and (Ore, 1998).
There has been an increasing awareness of the
need to include the information and content
found in older archaeological and cultural-
historically oriented documents into archaeological
and cultural heritage systems. Our method of
encoding and extracting information from electro-
nic versions of old archaeological reports has been
taken up by others (e.g. Crescioli et al., 2002;
Schloen, 2001; Meckseper and Warwick, 2003).
Schloen suggests an XML formalism for storing
and interchanging archaeological information.
Meckseper and Warwick describe the situation in
the UK and point out the usefulness of XML.
Both address the question of how to use XML for
writing and storing new archaeological documents.
In the course of the work in the two projects our
main philosophy was to consider the old reports
and catalogues as first-class objects in the informa-
tion system. Thus the reports and catalogues were
converted into electronic texts. In addition to
C.-E. Ore and Ø. Eide
162 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
traditional structural markup they were also given
an extensive semantic SGML/XML markup. The
encoding of the semantic content reflects our view
on what constitutes important archaeological infor-
mation and does not necessarily coincide with the
concept of the 19th century author of the original
material. The original author included information
according to his concepts, from which we encode
the subset that matches our conception or ontology.
Thus it is important to include the original texts and
make them available to future readers. This will
enable them to judge for himself or herself. See
Holmen et al. (2004) for a more detailed presenta-
tion of the encoding process.
The example in Fig. 1 illustrates the method. The
small text found in [1] is a fragment of an imaginary
archaeological excavation report and contains many
of the problems encountered in actual archaeologi-
cal grey literature. The left column in the example
shows some of the information that can be read out
of the text, expressed in a simplified CIDOC CRM
form. The column to the right is the text fragment
with a simple TEI markup. The elements indicate
which parts of the text correspond to the informa-
tion objects on the left. Two main events are iden-
tified. The reading assumes that the breaking of the
sword occurred during the excavation and that the
pronoun he points to the appellation Dr. Diggey.
This is not the only possible reading, but in this
example, clearly the most probable. However, the
uncertainty even in this simple case is an indication
of why it is important to link extracted information
to the source.
3 CIDOC CRM
CIDOC CRM (Crofts et al., 2008) is a formal ontol-
ogy intended to facilitate the integration, mediation
and interchange of heterogeneous cultural heritage
information. It was developed by interdisciplinary
teams of experts, coming from fields such as com-
puter science, archaeology, museum documenta-
tion, history of arts, natural history, library
science, physics and philosophy, under the aegis of
the International Committee for Documentation
(CIDOC) of the International Council of
Museums (ICOM).
The CIDOC CRM is an event-centric core ontol-
ogy in the sense that the model does not have classes
for all particulars like, for example, the Art and
Architecture Thesaurus with thousands of concepts.
The central idea is that the notion of historical con-
text can be abstracted as things, people and ideas
meeting in space-time. The model contains in
Fig. 1 Information markup and extraction from the fragment in [1]
TEI and cultural heritage ontologies
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 163
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
addition identification of real world items by real
world names (appellations), a generalized classifica-
tion mechanism (types), part-decomposition of
immaterial and physical things, temporal entities,
groups of people (actors), places and time (time
span), location of temporal entities in space-time
and physical things in space, reference of informa-
tion objects to any real world item (aboutness), and
intellectual influence of things and events on human
activities.
CIDOC CRM is defined in an object-oriented
formalism which allows for a compact definition
with abstraction and generalization through the
inheritance mechanisms (ISA hierarchy). CIDOC
CRM has 86 classes and 137 properties. The most
central classes and properties for data interchange
are shown in Fig. 2.
As an illustration of how events can be modelled
in CRM, a traditional English wedding is used as an
example. As shown in Fig. 3, the event is at the core
of the model, both conceptually and visually.
Through this the event occurring at a specific loca-
tion, the persons, the groom, the bride and the
groom’s best man are connected. Their roles
and the event itself are classified by the types
(e.g. selected from a thesaurus).
In an information system the formal relation
between the spouses has to be deduced by checking
whether the two have participated in a wedding
event in the role of bride and groom. Alternatively
one may introduce short-cut relations indicated in
grey at the bottom.
One of the basic principles in the development of
the CIDOC CRM has been to have empirical con-
firmation for the concepts in the model. That is, for
each concept there must be evidence from actual
data structures widely used. Such evidence is
found in mapping database schemata from different
domains to the CIDOC CRM and from actual har-
monization efforts with competitive proposals. Even
though the model was initially based on data struc-
tures in museum applications, most of the classes
and relationships are surprisingly generic. The
model was accepted by ISO in 2006 as ISO21127.
The archival standard EAD has already been
mapped without any problems to the CIDOC
CRM (Theodoridou and Doerr, 2001). A more chal-
lenging task has been the harmonization of CIDOC
CRM and IFLA’s library ontology FRBR (FRBR,
1998). The harmonization work was started in
2003 and has recently been completed (see FRBR
Review Group, 2008). In the process it became
clear that the CIDOC CRM did not make sufficient
distinctions on the level of concepts and symbolic
representations. Some minor changes had to be
introduced, see (FRBRoo, 2008) and (Doerr and
Fig. 2 The CIDOC CRM, top classes for data integration
C.-E. Ore and Ø. Eide
164 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
LeBoeuf, 2007). This was an example of how harmo-
nization work can improve the models and encoding
schemas. It is our hope that the study presented in
this article can help reach a deeper understanding of
the TEI P5 ontological modules and formal ontolo-
gies exemplified by the CIDOC CRM.
4 Text Encoding and Conceptual
Models
The Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) is a consortium
which according to its website ‘collectively develops
and maintains a standard for the representation of
texts in digital form. Its chief deliverable is a set of
Guidelines which specify encoding methods for
machine-readable texts, chiefly in the humanities,
social sciences and linguistics.’
The TEI has published five major editions of its
recommendations (P1–P5). The markup tool has
shifted from SGML to XML. The most recent ver-
sion of the guidelines, TEI P5, is completely XML-
based and comprises XML schemata for adding
XML-based markup to electronic texts. Using
these guidelines and schemata, the texts’ formal
and logical structure, as well as inline annotations
in the texts can be made available for further ana-
lysis and presentation. The TEI XML schemata are
intentionally defined in a weak manner to cover
most genres and text types. The TEI guidelines are
focused on how to annotate texts and do not pre-
scribe any specific conceptual model. However, cen-
tral parts of the TEI recommendations, e.g. the TEI
header, presuppose an implicit underlying concep-
tual model.
TEI has in its twenty years of history concen-
trated on the markup of functional aspects of texts
and their parts. That is, a person’s name is marked,
but linking to information about the real-world
person denoted by that name was not in the main
scope. The TEI has not focused on the markup of
the semantic content based on possible readings of a
text, and there are not many examples of (TEI-
based) markup of semantic content of texts. There
may be several reasons for this situation. We see the
following three as most important: First, it is very
time-consuming to do such encoding. Secondly, it is
less objective and tends to be more contested than
functional markup. Thirdly and perhaps more
important, there has not been any well-developed
uniform formalism or guidelines for the encoding
of semantic content.
The scope of TEI has gradually broadened, how-
ever, to include more real world information exter-
nal to the texts in question. The Master project
(Master, 2001) is an early example of this change.
In TEI P5 a series of new elements for marking up
real-world information is introduced and several
Fig. 3 A CRM diagram for a traditional English wedding
TEI and cultural heritage ontologies
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 165
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
such elements from the P4 are adjusted. The TEI
guidelines are intended to cover encoding of a
large variety of texts in many cultural contexts and
genres. For this reason one may argue that TEI
should not have ontological elements at all or they
should be independent of any specific ontology.
However, this ideal is not possible and perhaps
not feasible to follow completely. For example, the
elements in the TEI header and the bibliographical
module are quite naturally based on the traditional
(implicit), conceptual model used by most librar-
ians. The new and revised modules described in
TEI P5, Chapter 13 Names, Dates, People, and
Places, are defined without any explicit references
to any specific ontology and are designed to cover
a wide variety of real world descriptions. Here the
authors of the guidelines apparently intend to follow
an ontological neutrality ideal. It is however not
possible to define this set of elements without
having (several) implicit conceptual models in
mind. This part of the TEI P5 may have been clearer
if these mental models had been harmonized and
made explicit in the guidelines. It is not our inten-
tion in this article to suggest an internal harmoniza-
tion of TEI P5. Instead we have mapped the central
part of the well-defined ontology CIDOC CRM into
the set of these elements and thereby tested the
expressive power of these elements.
As mentioned earlier, it is important for the
reproducibility of scientific deduction to document
on the basis of which part of the source text con-
clusions are made. Names and other text fragments
denoting places, persons, events, etc., should be
marked up in the running text. The corresponding
real world information should be added as a sepa-
rate XML-structure in, for example, the header of an
TEI-encoded text. Pointers should be used to con-
nect the part of the texts that are used as the source
for the objects and properties (e.g. names) to the
structure in the header. In a CIDOC CRM compli-
ant setting, for example, a TEI name element with
the attribute type set to person should be inter-
preted as an instance of the CIDOC CRM Class
E82 Actor Appellation and linked to the corre-
sponding element in the CIDOC CRM XML-
encoded structure. To be able to do this one gen-
erally needs to go through the TEI elements and
define a correspondence between the TEI elements
and the classes and properties of the conceptual
models. Then a CIDOC CRM compliant structure
can be extracted semi-automatically from a properly
marked-up text. This is similar to the work in the
Norwegian Documentation/Museum Project
described above, where the complete archaeological
database was extracted in a corresponding way from
densely tagged archaeological yearbooks and acqui-
sition catalogues.
The TEI XML schema is defined in such a way
that one can ‘plug in’ other XML schemata by the
use of external name spaces. The archival standard
EAD is defined by an XML schema. The conceptual
models CIDOC CRM and FRBRoo are defined in an
object-oriented formalism, but can alternatively be
defined by XML schemata. Thus information com-
pliant with the conceptual models EAD, CIDOC
CRM and FRBRoo can easily be stored in an
extended TEI header by the use of the name-space
technique. Alternatively the real world or ontologi-
cal information can be stored in separate XML-
documents and packed with the TEI-encoded texts
into a whole by the use of METS (METS, 2008).
We may divide these methods into three different
strategies for integrating the TEI-encoded text with
a conceptual model:
1. Store the information as an external XML-
document, e.g. RDF (RDF, 2008) or CRM-
Core (Sinclair et al., 2006). This external
document can then be stored with the TEI docu-
ment, e.g. by using METS.
2. Store the information in the TEI-header using
an external XML name-space, e.g. RDF or CRM-
Core.
3. Store the information in the TEI-header using
the existing elements in TEI P5.
Depending on the work at hand, all of these three
methods may be useful. The objective of this inves-
tigation is, however, to study the expressive force of
the ontological elements introduced in the recently
published TEI P5. Thus, the method we discuss in
this article is the third one.
In the rest of this article we will study the onto-
logical elements in the TEI P5 compared with the
CIDOC CRM. We have been working with the
C.-E. Ore and Ø. Eide
166 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
CIDOC CRM for many years and in our opinion it
is the best conceptual model or ontology for the
cultural heritage sector. Thus, it is a good tool for
such a comparison.
Both TEI P5 and CIDOC CRM are the result of
ongoing community based research. CIDOC CRM
was accepted as an ISO standard in 2006 with pos-
sible amendments in 2009. The TEI guidelines are a
set of recommendations and not a fixed standard,
and details may be changed more easily. This study
is based on TEI P5 as it was in November 2008.
In this paper we have focused on the basic ontolo-
gical parts and not on the details.
5 TEI P5 Ontology Elements in the
Light of CIDOC CRM
In TEI P5 most of the ontologically oriented ele-
ments are defined in the modules described in chap-
ter 2, The TEI Header, in chapter 10, Manuscript
Description, and in chapter 13, Names, Dates,
People. Most of the new elements stem from the
work with the encoding of manuscripts and manu-
script catalogues (e.g. the Master project). In the
TEI P5 the existing ontological elements from P4
are explained in a more systematic way together
with the new elements. Even though the TEI con-
sortium presents itself as ‘maintaining a standard for
the representation of texts in digital form’ the TEI
P5 is meant to be a set of recommendations and not
a fixed standard with respect to the use of the ele-
ments. The set of ontological elements in chapter 13
is not intended to be a (part of a) definition of a
formal ontology. Other parts, especially the ele-
ments for bibliographical information found in the
TEI header, are very closely related to the concep-
tual model underlying current library cataloguing
standards. The implicit model in the TEI header
and the one described in chapter 13 overlap. For
example, publPlace mark up the name of the place
for publication of a book, while placeName can
contain any place name. A publicationStmt element
contains information about an event, the publica-
tion, while event is in chapter 13, but is not intended
to be used in connection with bibliographical
information.
The elements in chapter 13 are the most general
ontological elements. In the following these ele-
ments will be compared with the corresponding ele-
ments in the CIDOC CRM. In Fig. 4 the main
elements in chapter 13 of the TEI P5 are listed
with the closest corresponding element in the
CIDOC CRM. There is not always a complete
match as the scope notes indicates.
In TEI P5 the core ontological elements are place,
person and org. To each element there is a corre-
sponding name element labelled placeName,
personName and orgName, respectively, which can
be used to mark up strings in the running text
denoting the real world objects. There is a well-
developed specialization hierarchy of names with
respect to the type of real world object they
denote: (geopolitical) block, country, region, settle-
ment. The element country is equivalent to
‘<placeName type¼‘‘country’’>’ settlement to
‘<placeName type¼‘‘settlement’’>’ etc. The ele-
ments are meant be used to mark up strings used
denoting a country, a settlement and so on. Similar
hierarchies exist for personName and orgName. On
the top of the hierarchies is the general name ele-
ment. This hierarchy is handy and, at the first
glance, intuitive. It constitutes, however, a fragment
of a specific conceptual model implicitly underlying
this part of the TEI P5. In ordinary language the
term ‘country’ has several meanings. In this setting
it can denote: an organization (in the political
science sense), a physical territory or a place. The
CIDOC CRM makes a clear distinction between a
place and what is located or connected to it. The
model underlying TEI P5 is unclear and underspe-
cified at this point.
The two core ontological elements person and org
represent individual humans and groups/legal
bodies, respectively. The TEI has corresponding
name elements, but no detailed hierarchy as is the
case for geographically oriented names. The distinc-
tion between individuals and groups such as legal
bodies is commonly used, but TEI does not have a
super element ‘actor’. Without this general actor
element, one always either has to specify a group
or an individual.
In conceptual models the meaning is usually
expressed by properties or relations between
TEI and cultural heritage ontologies
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 167
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
instances of the classes (e.g. person, events and
place). The wedding example in Fig. 3 illustrates
this. The relation element in TEI P5 is an open
schema for encoding all relations between instances
of place, person and org. Relations can be established
on the basis of a reading of a text. However,
the relations are rarely identified by a name or a
string in the text. Therefore a relationName
element is unnecessary and is not included in the
TEI P5.
Fig. 4 Some central ontological elements in the TEI P5 and corresponding classes and mechanisms in the CIDOC CRM
C.-E. Ore and Ø. Eide
168 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
TEI P5 uses the type attribute in relationGrp to
group relations. The name attribute of the relation
element is to identify the kind of relation (spouse,
best man, employed by), as shown in the TEI P5
example reproduced in Fig. 5. The values of the
name attributes identify the meaning of the relation.
In general the values of the name attribute should be
taken from the fixed set of the relation names of the
underlying ontology, e.g. the CIDOC CRM.
In TEI P5 the events are seen as nameless sec-
ondary ontological elements. This is surprising.
First, events are often identified by an appellation.
Strings like ‘the Second World War’ or ‘Digital
Humanities 2008’ clearly denotes events. The intro-
duction of an eventName element can easily be
defended although it is not strictly necessary since
the general name element with a proper type can be
used instead. Secondly, events will very often be the
cause why relations between persons are established.
As previously mentioned, the wedding is another
example. The best man relation is relative to a wed-
ding as is the spouse relation.
In TEI P5 the use of the relation element is
restricted to relations between persons, actors and
places. This restriction should be weakened so that
the relation element can be used to encode relations
between places, actors (persons and organizations)
and events. As the the wedding example in Fig. 3
illustrates, we would then need both a type attribute
and a name attribute in the relation elements. The
value of the name attribute indicates the category of
relation, e.g. ‘participation’ and the value of the type
attribute the finer subcategorization, e.g. ‘spouse’,
‘bride’. The values of the type attribute should be
taken from a well-defined thesaurus in an external
name space or defined by the use of the taxonomy
element in the TEI header of the document
One may however argue that the connection
between the relation and an event can be deduced
by the fact that the name elements (persName)
denoting the related persons occur textually inside
the corresponding event element. That is, if the
names of the groom and the best man occur
inside a text embraced by event tags and describing
the wedding, then one can clearly deduce the rela-
tion (best man of, spouse) between the persons is
directly linked to the event. However, in most real
texts such a neat textual embedding will not be the
case and the connection has to be stated explicitly.
5.1 Classification and type systems
in the TEI
In the previous sections we discussed the ontological
core classes: places, actors (person and org in the
TEI), objects, abstracts, events, appellations (names)
and the generalized relation schema. In a conceptual
model one also needs mechanisms to describe and
classify the instance of the classes. In general
descriptions are given as free-text notes.
Classification is usually done by selecting terms
from a closed vocabulary or taxonomy expressed
as a thesaurus. In the CIDOC CRM an instance of
a class can be given a description (a string) via the
typed P3 has note property and a type via the P2 has
type property. The CIDOC CRM is a core ontology
and does not include any elaborate classification
systems. The class E55 Type is meant to be a hook
for the actual classification systems.
TEI P5 has a surprisingly rich set of elements and
attributes that can be used to describe and classify
real world entities of the ‘classes’ person, org and
place, see the table in Fig. 6. In addition to the
common elements like sex and education, one
finds the two general classification elements trait
and state. In the TEI P5 module system the other
elements are grouped as trait-like or state-like prop-
erties. It is not evident that this is a useful distinc-
tion. The two elements trait and state can be
Fig. 5 Example from TEI P5 guidelines for relation and
relationGrp
TEI and cultural heritage ontologies
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 169
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
difficult to use in a meaningful way. It may also be
so that the distinction between ‘trait’ and ‘state’ is
language-dependent. One may also ask if it is neces-
sary to have such a large collection of very specific
elements for the characterization of persons and
places. However, many of these elements have
been added during the long history of TEI for spe-
cific purposes including, for example, the descrip-
tion of the social background of speakers in
transcribed oral material. Thus the set of elements
is ad hoc and does not represent any underlying
conceptual model. A simple and sound clean-up
will be to extend the scope of the desc (description)
element to be a general description of the denota-
tion of its parent element and not only a description
of the use of the element as it is today. In addition
the type attribute should be used to specify the type
of description, that is ‘<desc type¼‘‘age’’>’ should
be equivalent to ‘<age>’ and so on.
Most of the elements in Fig. 6 can be given attri-
butes for temporal information: period, when,
notBefore, notAfter, from, to and editorial informa-
tion: cert, resp, evidence, source, precision. The ‘edi-
torial attributes’ are used for information on a
meta-level and thus not a part of the real world
description. The ‘temporal’ attributes are more pro-
blematic. First, it is hardly useful to equip an age
element with an attribute notBefore. We believe such
peculiarities stem from the wish to make a compact
definition of TEI P5. Secondly, the use of the tem-
poral attributes transforms a property into a tem-
poral entity or a state. Thirdly, the temporal
attributes may hide facts that should be explicit. It
is a very powerful mechanism for expressing synop-
tic information based on extensive hidden scholarly
investigation about real world events. As long as the
justification for the values in these elements is not
present, however, it is hard to map this information
onto an event centric conceptual model like the
CIDOC CRM or to exchange information with
any system based on other semantic contractions.
The TEI P5 currently has no element sets for
general classification. As for other topics like
events and relations, the TEI has the necessary ele-
ments for classification according to a formal tax-
onomy, but they are confined to bibliographical
classification, as stated in the scope notes shown
in Fig. 7. A simple extension of the scope of the
elements classDecl, taxonomy and catRef to all
kinds of classifications will give TEI a general
mechanism for classification according to formal
taxonomies.
5.2 Objects and abstracts
The CIDOC CRM, as an original model for
museums, has a well-developed hierarchy of classes
for physical things and objects. In addition the CRM
has a class hierarchy for abstracts (conceptual
Fig. 6 Some of the description and classification element
in the TEI P5
Fig. 7 The elements available for encoding taxonomies
C.-E. Ore and Ø. Eide
170 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
objects). Examples are the motif of a painting or the
content of a text. This hierarchy has been consider-
ably extended as a result of the harmonization with
FRBR. FRBR has a four-level, hierarchical work
expression, manifestation and item. The first three
represent abstracts and the fourth, physical objects
(e.g. books). In the FRBRoo the work, expression
and manifestation hierarchy is plugged in as sub-
classes in the conceptual objects hierarchy of
CIDOC CRM, as an item in the physical object
hierarchy.
The TEI P5 has no general elements for encoding
information about concrete and abstract objects. It
has, however, two specialized element sets, one for
bibliographical information and one for informa-
tion about manuscripts as physical objects. The
bibl element can contain information about mani-
festations and expressions in the FRBR sense. The
msDesc and objectDesc elements can contain infor-
mation about a physical manuscript: size, material,
owner, and so on. The elements msDesc and
objectDesc do not correspond to item in the FRBR
or to a subclass of physical objects in the CIDOC
CRM, but are descriptions or classifications of such
entities. If the scope of desc is extended the
‘<msDesc>’ will be equal to ‘<desc type¼‘‘ms’’>’.
A necessary extension to the TEI will be to introduce
the new elements conceptualObject and
physicalObject.
6 Conclusions
In this article we have studied the expressive power
of the real world descriptions TEI P5 by mapping
central parts of the CIDOC CRM onto TEI P5. It is
clear that the TEI P5 has moved a great step in the
direction of an event-oriented model compared
with TEI P4. Our use of CIDOC CRM as a yardstick
has shown that the expressiveness can be greatly
improved by extending the scope of very restricted
elements like the relation element. On the other
hand it is also clear that some parts of the real
world description in TEI, like the persTraitLike
and persStateLike modules, represent an ad hoc
selection of types of real world descriptors.
In Ore and Eide (2006), we suggested that the
real world information should be stored in a sepa-
rate formalism outside or within the TEI header.
We still believe this is the best solution in many
cases. However, the result of this limited study
ensure that with the extensions and adjustments
suggested in this article and summarized below, it
will be possible to express information that confirms
with the CIDOC CRM by the use of the tag sets in
TEI P5. Thus the information can be stored as an
integrated part of the TEI document as well.
Suggested extensions and adjustments:
– Introduce an element conceptualObject for con-
ceptual/abstract objects.
– Introduce an element physicalObject for physical
objects.
– Extend the scope of relation to the object ele-
ments and to the event element and add a type
attribute.
– Extend the scope of taxonomy to non-textual
entities
– Extend the scope of desc to all ontological ele-
ments and let desc be a super element of the
classification elements, e.g. ‘<age>’ will be equal
to ‘<desc type¼‘‘age’’>’
– Consider to state explicitly other equivalences
like ‘<publisher>’ and ‘<name type¼
‘‘publisher’’>’
To continue this research, an extended TEI tagset
should be developed with elements for abstracts cor-
responding to the ones in FRBR and CRM. This will
not change the ontological structure of TEI signifi-
cantly. However, these adjustments will make the
ontological information in a TEI document compli-
ant with the other cultural heritage models includ-
ing, for example, EAD, FRBR/FRBRoo, CIDOC
CRM, MUSEUMDAT and CDWA-Lite. It is impor-
tant that TEI is a part in the ongoing harmonization
process between all these initiatives, and thus will
enable wide information integration and exchange
beyond TEI encoded data.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our colleagues at the Unit
for Digital Documentation and in the Museum and
TEI and cultural heritage ontologies
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 171
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Documentation Project for the many interesting
discussions about data integration and text encod-
ing over the years. The working group meeting in
the CRM SIG, the FRBRoo and the meetings in TEI
ontology SIG and the many good colleagues in the
digital humanities have also been important sources
of inspiration.
