Access
............................................................................................................................................................
John Lavagnino
King’s College London, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Digital editions have some distinct features that are not present in digital
libraries. Therefore it is somewhat worrisome that there are far more digital
libraries than digital editions. This essay argues that the reason for this is not
only a pressure towards all-inclusiveness but also the fact that scholarly editions
are addressing both scholars and common readers, each of them having their own
expectations of what a digital edition should actually offer. The essay suggests
that we should get away from the idea of access to data as the principal merit of
the edition and suggests a model of criticism instead, meaning that editors should
represent their work as providing critical points of view on the texts they are
offering, with their actual contents thrown in.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
This essay was written in 1997. It has not been sig-
nificantly updated but reflects that particular
moment in the debate on electronic text.
1 Digital Editions and
Digital Libraries
One way we can sum up the goal of the scholarly
editions we create is to use the term ‘access’: we
want to give people access to particular textual
materials and to particular understandings of
those materials. Because computers facilitate new
ways of providing such access, they have become
of central importance in what we do. But although
nearly every editorial project is now built on com-
puter processing, there are not all that many elec-
tronic editions coming out. The electronic texts that
are being published almost all reprint books without
making analyses of their texts. Or, to use a different
set of terms, we have a lot of digital libraries, but not
many digital editions. Both approaches are impor-
tant, but digital editions have distinctive features
that are not present in digital libraries, and their
scarcity is worrisome.
By ‘digital edition’ I mean a scholarly edition
published in electronic form. As a scholarly edition,
it must provide more than just a good digital repro-
duction of some piece of text; it tries to survey
all relevant sources for a particular work, and to
make an attempt to understand the bibliographic
situation beyond the obvious (and perhaps mislead-
ing) facts of the text. That analysis might be directed
to establishing a new text, or just to improving our
understanding of the various texts we have already.
It almost always needs to be based on more than just
the immediate verbal or visual information in the
texts: it might draw on studies of the physical embo-
diments of the texts, of the textual information
itself, or of historical records. To give an example:
it is one thing to reprint the text of The Revenger’s
Tragedy, and it is another to emend errors in
the play’s text, or to make an argument about its
authorship. These last two activities depend on argu-
ment that goes beyond the facts preserved in the
original publication. It is a perfectly respectable
thing to provide an accurate transcription or photo-
graphic reproduction of one copy of a book, and in
many cases those tasks require a considerable
amount of scholarly expertise and judgment, but
the potential achievements of these tasks are different
from those that are possible in a scholarly edition.
A ‘digital library’, as the term is used in the world
today, and as I will use it, does not involve any
Correspondence:
John Lavagnino, Centre for
Computing in the
Humanities, King’s College
London, Strand, London
WC2R 2LS, UK.
E-mail:
john.lavagnino@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
63
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn038
analysis; it is devoted to reproducing existing books,
but not to any critical or bibliographical analysis.
Our new digital libraries—like the ones that are
sold by companies like Chadwyck-Healey, or those
being operated out of universities, such as the var-
ious projects at the University of Michigan and the
University of Virginia—are digital continuations of
the microfilm tradition, and they have strengths and
weaknesses similar to those of the great microfilm
series created since the 1930s, such as the STC and
Wing series from University Microfilms. Those
series have often been based on existing compila-
tions or catalogues, and so have had a sound schol-
arly basis; and they have made those existing
resources more valuable by improving access to
the primary sources. At the same time, the eco-
nomic basis of these projects requires that they do
things quickly and inexpensively, and inevitably
there are errors. The STC microfilm series once
represented an 1810 type-facsimile as a copy of a
book published two centuries earlier, for example
(see the note on item 774 in the revised STC).1
Such errors are easier to correct in a digital library
than in a print or microfilm publication; but it is still
the case that these digital libraries are based on an
approach that involves reproducing a lot of informa-
tion and not analyzing it very much. The standard at
which they aim is accurate reproduction of correctly
identified items, and not thorough study. Most of
the work involved can be done by programmers,
typists, and clerks with no special expertise in the
subject area, and it has proven successful and feasible
for commercial organizations to produce such
microfilm series and digital libraries with advice
from, but not the extensive involvement of, scholars.
My distinction, then, can be made in a practical
way: the digital library can be created by workers
who have no special knowledge of the material, and
indeed may not know the language it is written in;
given proper instructions, photographic reproduc-
tion and sometimes even transcription may be done
by such workers. In terms of the ends of each
approach, we can see the difference as that between
a focus on data and a focus on understanding, or
between breadth and depth. Both approaches are
important, but of course for our purposes as textual
scholars digital editions are more interesting.
And the difference in the present fortunes of these
two approaches therefore deserves some thought.
There is a vast amount of digital-library work;
even at the level of individual activity, leaving
aside the large projects I have alluded to, there are
lots of people putting texts on the Web and not too
many doing it in a way that reflects much knowl-
edge of editing. For, in the popular mind, the dis-
tinction I have made between digital libraries and
digital editions does not exist, and that is because a
knowledge of the existence of the second type, or of
scholarly editing in general as a distinct practice, is
not very common in the popular mind. (And, for
reasons I will be getting to in a moment, when I say
‘popular’ I am including in that category most
people in most humanities departments in the
world of higher education.) There are ways in
which digital editions are especially advantageous,
beyond the advantages they provide in a digital
library; and yet we do not see many of these editions
appearing (though I will be looking at some excep-
tions). People working on digital editions are also
(one observes) in many cases rather pessimistic
these days about the whole thing, whereas digital
libraries seem to be booming. And not too many
people really think that the dearth of digital editions
is a problem; and that is a problem.
Why are things like this? One reason is prac-
tical: creating digital editions is expensive, techni-
cally difficult, and time-consuming, just as was the
case with scholarly editions published on paper. But
this is a dispiriting subject, so I am not going to
discuss it. The aspect of the question that interests
me more is this: what is it about the situation
that tends to encourage the digital library (or
access to data) and discourages the digital edition
(or access to understanding)? I do not feel that the
generally greater expense and difficulty of creating
the digital edition compared to paper editions is a
complete explanation; the digital-library world is
noteworthy for apparently attracting a good deal
of money from somewhere, and certainly many of
these projects are of remarkable size. There are, I
think, some problems with the nature of what
we do as editors, and with what people think we
do as editors, and with what people think they
want us to do.
J. Lavagnino
64 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
2 The Problem of the Two
Audiences
One source of our problems is in our tradition of
how we do editions, so I am going to devote part
of my space to print editions. And because the series
of conferences in Toronto for which this essay was
originally written has a tradition of ranging across
times, places, and subjects a lot more broadly than
most discussions of editing do, I should stress that
this discussion focuses on how we have edited
English-language texts over the last 50 years or
so—so that ‘we’ refers to people who have been
doing that particular kind of work. Much of my
analysis may not apply to people working on
other languages, or on very different sorts of texts,
because editing is an activity that can become
almost unrecognizable when it is carried on in
fields just a short distance from your own.
We have a major problem as editors of English-
language texts, which I am going to call the problem
of the two audiences. When we create editions, we
are thinking about readers in two disciplines: read-
ers who are editors, and readers who are not editors
but who study English-language literature. And
we prefer not to think that the front of the book
is for common readers and the back of the book is
for the editors. We all want our readers to look not
only at the texts we have established but also at our
textual commentaries and notes; we do not want
those parts to be treated as being just for other
editors. But scholars in any field are inclined to
address, first of all, other scholars of the same
type: literary critics write for literary critics, histori-
ans for historians, and so on. They usually assume a
knowledge of the field as background—because it
is not always easy to articulate the assumptions
about evidence and argumentation that are current
in one’s field, it can require a lot of space, and it
is often socially inappropriate. When you address
the other members of a community, you do some-
times stress shared beliefs as a way of sustaining
that community, but you also cannot list every
belief, or mention them every time. Readers hardly
expect every essay in literary criticism to begin
with an argument about the nature and value
of literary criticism. Or, in this essay, if I had to
explain the whole background to questions
about editing that I raise, I did never get past the
introduction.
And English-language editing in the period I am
speaking of has unquestionably advanced farther
than ever before towards being a discipline quite
distinct from other forms of literary study, while
still retaining the need to speak to a popular audi-
ence. This is why when I say ‘the popular audience’
or ‘the common reader’ I am referring to a class that
includes many scholars; if they have not had any
involvement or interest in editing, they are outside
the audience of editors, and belong only to the other
audience. And while editors are generally aware
that they are addressing both editors and common
readers—that their editions are works of populari-
zation as well as pure scholarly communications—it
is not actually easy to keep this in mind or to put it
into practice. Making editions that work for both
editors and for the popular audience will always be
tricky, and moving into the digital world does not
really make it much easier. The problem is more
than just that of being interdisciplinary, as editing
is, since there are many interdisciplinary fields that
wind up turning into nearly independent disci-
plines, without retaining the obligation to speak to
outsiders in the ordinary course of work. The field
of ‘literature and science’ is like this, for example:
there is a society organized around this field of
study, there are conferences, journals, standard
approaches, eminent leaders and rising stars, and
so forth, and it is quite possible for a scholar to
work mainly within that world and not worry very
much about opinion in the rest of the scholarly
world. But a scholarly editor is still always expected
to serve a larger community that may not—and, at
present, usually does not—take any great interest in
the discipline of editing. The situation is quite like
the tense relationship between certain parts of the
humanities-computing world and the humanities at
large: that of producers and a bigger class they are
expected to serve. Service is not a function that is
held in high regard by humanities scholars; it is
useful and necessary but not well rewarded.
There has been some discussion of this problem,
notably Peter Shillingsburg’s discussion of how edi-
torial apparatus has (in English-language editing
Access
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 65
over the past 50 years) often not focused on the
information that matters to readers: it has tended
to focus on the activity of the editor rather than on
the shaping of the text by those involved in its ori-
ginal creation and dissemination. That is, many edi-
tions have offered access to the wrong thing.2 My
discussion is both more mundane and more gener-
alized, and proceeds by way of a look at some fea-
tures of a few print editions. The two-audience
problem is not going to go away with digital edi-
tions, so having some idea of this historic problem
with editions will be useful to us; and, while I have
noticed some of these problems in digital editions,
most of those editions are still works in progress,
and I feel it is more appropriate to discuss editions
whose creators have had plenty of time to reflect on
their work and modify their approach if necessary.
And although I am going to do a lot of complaining
about print editions, let me stress that I have chosen
only to talk about very good editions; it is easy to
find flawed work in any field of scholarship, but
what is interesting are the lingering flaws in the
best work, not the masses of flaws in the bad stuff.
I am also quite aware that the practical problem of
limited space has been a factor influencing some of
the failings I am going to discuss: so that editors
may often have wanted to do otherwise, and they
likely anticipated my views in many cases, but were
not given the extra pages they needed. As we will
see, though, there are problems that wide-open
spaces can solve, and problems that they do not
have much to do with; keeping our popular reader-
ship in mind is not really easier in the digital world.
3 Understanding the Apparatus
Let me begin with elementary practical problems
and later move on to some deeper questions.
In English-language editing, the most obvious
problems that the popular audience has with edi-
tions stem from the apparatus, and such problems
frequently have the undesirable effect of leading
readers to ignore the apparatus or consider it too
hard to use. I am referring to things at a lower
intellectual level than the questions of selection
and arrangement that Peter Shillingsburg focused
on; I mean things like finding the apparatus and
figuring out what it is supposed to be doing,
which is necessary before you can come to any con-
clusion about whether the information matters to
you or not. A body of writing that touches on these
problems already exists: many reviews of editions
talk about practical difficulties with using them,
and Donald Reiman’s Romantic Texts and Contexts
collects several good ones.3 And there is a rather
disturbing article by Joseph Dane, on a study he
made that involved collecting press-variant infor-
mation from a large number of editions of
Renaissance plays: he found that he could not use
the information from a few of these because the
information was not well presented or just did not
make any sense.4 That says something about the
problem any ordinary reader potentially faces:
Dane’s work is moderately difficult analytical bib-
liography, devoted to clarifying our picture of part
of the early printing process; how well could we
expect general readers to cope?
One way of exploring this question is to consider
what some editions have done to explain their
workings to their readers. Here is an investigation
that produces some odd results: in their apparatus, a
great many editions use a square bracket to separate
the reading displayed in the text from other readings
found in various sources; but how many of them
actually explain this usage? (Or, for that matter, any
of the other usages the square bracket is put to: it
may separate the correct from the incorrect, the ear-
lier from the later, the modernized from the unmo-
dernized, the reading of one authoritative document
from that of another, or the reading of the text from
an explanation of the reading, among other things.)
If you look at editions of Renaissance plays, you will
find very few that provide any explanation of this
symbol; it is simply assumed that you know what
it means. (Major current series that print no expla-
nation, and that have plenty of space to accommo-
date it because they only publish one play in
each volume, include the Revels Plays, the New
Mermaids, the New Cambridge Shakespeare, and
the Oxford Shakespeare.) But if you look at editions
of American literature published within the last 50
years, it usually is explained—where it is used at all,
since a number of such editions (the Northwestern–
Newberry edition of Melville, for example)
J. Lavagnino
66 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
use a tabular layout for apparatus that avoids the
need for such a symbol altogether. The reason,
I believe, is that editions of Renaissance plays
assume a tradition of editorial presentation which
goes back quite some time, and which is therefore—
at least for an editor—so much of an implicit
assumption that it does not often occur to anyone
to explain it. But the boom in critical editing of
American literature was conducted in opposition
to traditional editorial treatments of those works,
so editors were more likely to think that some expla-
nations were needed. Even Renaissance editors,
when they do introduce conscious innovations in
apparatus, will typically take the trouble to explain
it; this is the practice, for example, of Fredson
Bowers in his edition of Dekker’s works.5
The Dekker edition is also interesting because it
does more than just provide definitions of the
meaning of various symbols: it prints a few exam-
ples and then provides prose explanations of what
they mean. This may seem like an obvious thing to
do, if you want people to read and understand your
apparatus, but it is actually quite rare.6 Several other
editions (of the random sample I have gone back to
look at) are outstanding in this respect. Edward
Connery Lathem’s edition of Robert Frost’s poems
in 1969 did include examples, as did David
Womersley’s edition of The Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire in 1994: both were trade publications
whose expected audience was not solely academic.7
Peter Robinson’s edition on CD-ROM of The Wife
of Bath’s Prologue provides good examples in its
introductory matter, and also provides explanations
of what you are looking at whenever you get a dis-
play of variants of any kind.8 And the Pennsylvania
edition of Dreiser’s works, of which Neda M.
Westlake is the general editor and James L. W.
West III is the textual editor, clearly has a deliberate
policy of explaining its apparatus with examples.
This even happens in the edition of Dreiser’s
American Diaries, in which the only apparatus pres-
ent is a very short list of minor emendations to the
manuscript, and the only notation to explain is the
unambiguous use of the square bracket to mean
‘emended from’.9
What you find in a lot of editions that do explain
their symbols fully, but without examples, is a table
showing their meaning, or a few paragraphs that run
very quickly through that material without going
into the intention behind the approach used. The
feeling one often gets from these approaches, espe-
cially the second one, is that of fine print: of some-
thing that provides a legalistic accounting of details
about what is going on that you are not really
expected to read or be able to follow, and that is
also not really going to be very new or striking, but
instead is a terse summary of the usual arrangement.
Examples of this approach would include the
William James and F. Scott Fitzgerald editions.
This way of doing things has the merit of many
editions of the last few decades more generally: the
merit that the relevant facts and editorial procedures
are much more fully documented than was
common before. It has the disadvantage of making
the editorial work appear to not be the reader’s
business, whereas what the Dreiser edition does is
more like an invitation to look at the texts along
with the editor.
4 The Implicit Boundaries
Respected by Editions
But let us look beyond this question, about the way
readers are addressed by the textual discussions in
editions, to the implicit attitude towards works con-
veyed by the larger question of the content of the
editorial material, and the impression readers might
get from that material of what the editors think
about the work. Consider the selection of things
that an edition does, and that are discussed in its
apparatus. The nature of this selection is usually
very strongly influenced by traditions and theories
of editing, but since the common reader is not typi-
cally aware of those, is outside the discipline of edit-
ing, he or she may be quite puzzled. An example
that is worth looking at is the edition of John
Dewey’s works, of which Jo Ann Boydston was the
general editor; one reason for this choice is
Boydston’s observation a few years back, when this
edition was nearly completed, that nobody seemed
to make use of its apparatus.10
Dewey in his writing often quotes from other
books. We editors all recognize the importance,
Access
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 67
when writers quote, of tracking down their sources
and comparing the texts, and as this is a good edi-
tion it does that and reports the results in a special
section of the apparatus. In a great many cases the
editors were able to check these quotations in books
from Dewey’s own library. But now here is what I
think may look strange to some readers. Dewey
sometimes quotes accurately and sometimes he
does not. When he quotes accurately, there is of
course no need to tell the reader what the text as
it appeared in his source was. So the Dewey edition
only has notes on the source and text of a quotation
in those cases where Dewey quoted inaccurately. In
other words, the editors know where all the quota-
tions came from, but they only tell the reader in
some cases. For example, Dewey has an essay
about Emerson that contains twenty-five quota-
tions, but only eight get identified in the appara-
tus.11 Now, I do not think it is hard to imagine
that a lot of readers would find it useful to know
the sources of the quotations, and that this partial
identification of those sources is likely to be frus-
trating and baffling to such readers. It is easy to
recognize why the Dewey edition is like this. It is
respecting very strictly a boundary between textual
work and the other kinds of things you could pro-
vide in an edition—in this case, the boundary
between establishing a text and writing an explana-
tory commentary; it is following in the footsteps of
Bowers’s Dekker edition, which contained no criti-
cal introductions or explanatory notes; and it is
trying to save space.12 The Dewey edition, at least,
did have critical and historical introductions in
most volumes, and about halfway through the edi-
tion they began to add some modest explanatory
notes. But the boundary which is so important to
the design of this edition, especially in its earlier
years, is one that exists only within the discipline
of textual scholarship. To philosophers, educators,
literary critics, almost any of the people who might
be reading this edition because of their interest in
Dewey, that boundary does not exist. There is no
reason for them to expect or imagine this kind of
restriction of scope, and the inclination would be to
regard explanatory notes as generally more useful
than textual discussions. Instead of perceiving the
boundary, such readers will more likely read the
apparatus as expressing what the editors think
about the texts as works, and will be rather puzzled
to find almost no discussion of philosophy, educa-
tion, and so on. And the natural conclusion would
be that the editors do not know or care about those
things, only about matters such as line-end
hyphenation: because, you would think, if they did
care about the content of these works they would be
writing about them.
It is important more generally to think about the
question of how we present our interests and our
work: I have spoken about the problem of under-
standing unexplained symbols, or forbidding expla-
nations, or peculiar-looking selections of
information, but there are even simpler sorts of
problems for the common reader. Editions often
fail to state rather crucial things about what they
are up to: the Bowers Dekker, and the Oxford
Shakespeare (in its single-volume edition of 1986),
both failed to explain important things about the
intended scope of the publication, and some readers
were puzzled because they did not know about the
plan to publish separate volumes of explanatory
notes (in the Dekker case) or of textual apparatus
(in the Shakespeare case). The front matter is fairly
important in an edition, but it is also something you
usually do last, and may have little control over,
since it is at this point that the publishers take
over the production. That may also explain some
cases in which things are done that obviously
make a bad impression. There is a fine edition of
a novel by William Dean Howells, The Quality of
Mercy, that has a section of explanatory notes that
must have caused readers other than myself to laugh
out loud upon seeing it: the text of this novel that is
several hundred pages long is followed, in the
Indiana edition, by an opening that contains a
single explanatory note, two lines long, under the
heading ‘Note to the Text’, facing a blank page.13
Paul Skinner’s edition of Ford Madox Ford’s No
Enemy also has a single explanatory note, but
since it is printed as a footnote to the text it does
not stand out in the same way.14 (Electronic pub-
lications are even more prone to such problems,
because they are often not created for display on
fixed screen sizes but are formatted dynamically,
and so the actual display any reader gets of a
J. Lavagnino
68 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
particular section of the publication is not likely to
have been checked over by anyone.)
5 The Editor’s Interests in the Text
The examples I have given illustrate cases of success
within the discipline of scholarly editing and failure
as popularization. All of these cases admit of
improvement: the discipline does not prohibit
explanatory or critical commentaries, after all. But
I do not believe it is always possible to resolve the
conflicting demands of the two readerships; the
point I wish to make is not merely that in electronic
editions we need to keep these two audiences in
mind and avoid some of the infelicities of earlier
editions, but that there are certain impasses that
we cannot avoid. This is particularly evident when
we confront the problem of showing the relation-
ship among multiple versions of a text. I think we
would agree that the ideal common reader for our
editions would take a great interest in all versions,
would be eager to compare them and think about
their relationships and so forth. However, the
demands of writing in the discipline push in an
opposite direction, towards conveying the message
that we as textual critics already know all about the
nature and relationships of the texts, and that there
is no need for our readers to get involved in those
questions.
Let me return to the Dreiser edition for an illus-
tration. You may have heard about controversies
regarding the Sister Carrie volume, turning on
whether an edition of this novel should be based
on the manuscript or on later typescripts or the
first edition. There are articulate partisans of both
the manuscript and the first edition. Now, here is
how James West begins his discussion of the issue in
his edition:
The selection of copy-text for Sister Carrie is
simple. Dreiser’s manuscript of the novel
automatically becomes the base text for this
edition. No other choice is possible: the type-
script was corrupted by Anna Mallon’s typists
and was revised and cut by Sara Dreiser and
Arthur Henry. The first printing was further
flawed by editorial interference and censoring
by Doubleday, Page and Company. Only the
manuscript preserves the original text of Sister
Carrie, the text that was most nearly under
Dreiser’s complete control.15
The selection of copy-text is simple; it is automatic.
The other texts are corrupt or flawed or censored.
All of this conveys a pretty strong message that the
case is quite settled and you do not want to waste
time with those bad texts. West goes on to talk
about the need to work with them for various rea-
sons, but this opening impression is still going to be
pretty powerful. To sum it up: the case sounds very
certain, and would seem to actively discourage a
reader’s further investigation of the matter.
People have talked about this problem before,
but typically within the framework of the old con-
troversy about whether bibliography is a science;
there is an excellent discussion of the bibliographer’s
mantle of science in Laurie Maguire’s book
Shakespearean Suspect Texts.16 However, James
West is not a scholar who talks about science a lot
or who in my observation tries to claim a scientific
authority for his work; there is certainly none of that
in this particular book. And the passage above is
different from many in textual introductions
because it does not use much technical language:
it is reasonably accessible to general readers. Here
is what I think is going on, and why this is quite a
difficult problem to handle: the passage is strongly
worded because West has strong feelings about
Dreiser’s novel and the text he believes is superior.
The idea many ordinary readers may have of editing
is like the man in the street’s idea of scholarship:
that it is dry and passionless; but we all know that
passions can run high in our field, and that passion
is an important driving force behind the work that
gets done. And consequently a textual scholar study-
ing a particular work is simply very likely to develop
strong feelings about the textual questions, and, no
less than the literary critic, the historian, the lin-
guist, or the physicist, will express these views
using the means of persuasion available within the
discipline’s rhetorical tradition. But the effect of
such an expression on those outside the field may
be rather different. A textual scholar reading the
account of Sister Carrie knows that of course all
the witnesses mentioned are important, and that
Access
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 69
the question of copy-text actually is a question; the
common reader does not have the right kind of
background knowledge and so does not realize any
of this.
It is not feasible to say, do not be rhetorical, do
not just argue your position but talk about them all.
This is equivalent to saying that editing is not a
scholarly or intellectual endeavor, but is just the
transmission of certain data—and even if that
were so, we will find that data itself involves difficult
issues.
6 The Problems with Data
One approach to dealing with multiple audiences is
to provide a different edition to each audience, vary-
ing the nature of the textual discussions and appa-
ratus, rather than trying to make one work for all.
We have seen some of this in the world of editing,
but it has generally been done by lopping off the
apparatus and giving what remains to the general
reader. This is not satisfactory except from a bleakly
practical standpoint, since it only reinforces the idea
that the stuff at the back of the book does not really
matter too much. If we want all readers to pursue an
interest in the textual situation, and if we want to
facilitate their access to our understanding of that
situation, this is the wrong way to go about it.
This is also an approach that was unfortunate
because it encouraged the idea that editions were
there to provide access to data. And data is strange
stuff; or, at any rate, the ideas that people develop
about data are strange. If we shift our attention now
to readers, and consider their feelings about data, we
can understand better some of the pressures impel-
ling us towards the digital library, and making it
more difficult for us to interest readers in the
things that are distinctive about our digital editions.
If you look at some of the feelings that are common
about the World Wide Web and about digital
libraries, you find (to summarize broadly) that
two sentiments come up a great deal: people want
everything, and they also want nothing (or almost
nothing).
People want everything: it is an oddly common
belief that everything is there on the Web some-
where, that it includes all important data of every
kind; and a modified form of this belief that is also
common is that everything ought to be on the Web.
In the realm of scholarly editing, you frequently see
this kind of thinking also: if you ask what an edition
ought to include, and suggest that it might or might
not include this or that version or work or docu-
ment, you will not hear too many people asking that
it be left out. There is a pressure towards all-inclu-
siveness. Note how many digital-edition projects
have words like ‘collected’ or ‘complete’ in their
titles, when, after all, for a new and experimental
activity something on a smaller scale might seem
like a better idea. (It was not always like this:
Roger Laufer, one of the very first people to work
on a digital edition, chose to edit one small book,
the Maximes of La Rochefoucauld.17) But even the
current digital-edition projects are small when set
against the projects that the desire for data impels us
toward. The problem with data that the desire to
have everything points to is that there is no intrinsic
limitation to any project founded on data collection;
many editorial projects fall back on the figure of the
author and of the author’s intentionally literary
works as their guide and limit, but this is not,
after all, the only way to study literature, and one
argument we make for editions—that the kind of
understanding we develop can have importance
beyond the particular texts we edit—works against
the idea that we can be really complete (if that is
what we want) while still limiting ourselves to the
one author. In particular, the study of the history of
the book, in covering the earlier years of movable
type, has produced a great deal of work that is
focused on particular printers rather than on
authors; the amount and breadth of this kind of
work diminishes as you look at later periods, but
it remains a productive way of looking at the field,
and is only one of the many other frameworks that
might be used for the study of written works. The
great dream of Peter Shillingsburg for an all-encom-
passing digital collection of everything Victorian
(see his essay elsewhere in this issue) is a beautiful
illustration of the possibilities in this line of
thinking.
The desire to have everything is often phrased in
practical and sensible terms, and to some extent
these are not illusory qualities: why would you
J. Lavagnino
70 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
restrict your access to data when you might need
some of it someday? But it opens up a limitless
prospect, and it becomes a mania if not checked
(as it usually is) by some background sense of the
actual limits of your interests. This desire for every-
thing and its excesses are not recent phenomena;
Roger Chartier, in studying plans for ideal libraries
and ideal library collections in the era of print,
noticed it even in works of the 1500s:
The various meanings given to the term for a
library thus clearly show one of the major
tensions that inhabited the literate of the
early modern age and caused them anxiety.
A universal library (or at least universal in
one order of knowledge) could not be other
than fictive, reduced to the dimensions of a
catalogue, a nomenclature, or a survey.
Conversely, any library that is actually
installed in a specific place and that is made
up of real works available for consultation and
reading, no matter how rich it might be, gives
only a truncated image of all accumulable
knowledge. The irreducible gap between ide-
ally exhaustive inventories and necessarily
incomplete collections was experienced with
intense frustration. It led to extravagant ven-
tures assembling—in spirit, if not in reality—
all possible books, all discoverable titles, all
works ever written.18
And he describes people who compiled catalogues
for ideal libraries that included imaginary works—
the extreme of the ‘all possible books’ tendency.19
What is different in the digital world is that some of
the practical barriers to the actual collection of such
an ideal library are diminished; you can get access to
a great deal more, but a consequence is that even
huge collections seem less impressive than they
ought to be. The strangely common, and infuriat-
ing, response of many people to some huge collec-
tions is still ‘Is that all there is?’.
But Chartier also described another impulse
common in the early catalogues he studied, and
that was an urge to set books in order, to convert
the randomness of the mass of published works into
something organized. We can see that impulse, too,
in the present day: another thing that bothers people
about the Web, and about scholarly editions, is that
there is too much extraneous information. It is in
this sense that people want nothing: out of the vast
bulk of data, they only want to hear about the tiny
part that is important to them right now. This reac-
tion goes back even farther than the era of print:
writing has bothered people, in a tradition going all
the way back to Plato, because it fails to respond to
us, and just keeps saying the same thing whether or
not that is appropriate or useful. With time we have
learned to ignore this discomfort in most situations,
but it still crops up, as in the annoyance that readers
frequently express at annotation they find excessive,
or at the interest scholars take in documents that
other people find uninteresting. Computers seem to
offer the possibility of bodies of data that really
would be filtered to match our interests; but of
course the interaction they can offer is really quite
limited, and so we still wind up being disappointed.
And the desire for nothing also molds scholarly
projects: it is one of the forces that pushes us
towards projects with a traditional shape, such as
the collected works of one or another author,
rather than projects that expand outwards along
other lines—because the familiarity of such a tradi-
tional shape helps defuse complaints of excess. That
is another reason for the appeal of the digital library:
the expectations we bring from our use of earlier
libraries, which always contain a great many books
we know we will never consult, put us in an appro-
priate frame of mind for understanding what we see
in many digital collections.
But in the end, if given a choice between every-
thing and nothing, most people settle for everything.
The worries about missing something win out over
the unhappiness about the irrelevant.
7 The Need for a Different Model
As scholarly editors, we cannot generate the impos-
ing masses of data that digital libraries collect; the
case for our work must rest on something more
than volume and totality. But getting away from
the idea of access to data as the principal merit of
what we are doing is difficult if we do not have some
Access
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 71
other model for our activity. What other models
might we entertain?
One approach that has already resulted in valu-
able work involves shifting the focus from the data
to ways of filtering it, so as to put readers in the
position not of asking for more but rather of finding
ways to get just what they want. This shift in focus
moves the attention to an activity for readers: to an
emphasis on particular operations that are available,
rather than the simple promise of getting informa-
tion. And the development of approaches to filter-
ing is something you can often do more effectively
and usefully with a small corpus than with huge
quantities of data, because the method can be
more precisely tailored to the nature of the collec-
tion; that also means that it can address the usual
problem with searching large collections—the ten-
dency of searches to turn up a lot of irrelevant items
as well as those that fit. One good example of this
kind of filtering may be found in the William Blake
Archive, developed at the University of Virginia,
which includes a wonderful index to images created
by Blake and reproduced in the archive.20 You can,
for example, look at the set of all the images that
include either a hammer, a plinth, or streams of
gore; the full set of things that are indexed is a
huge list of objects, animals, plants, human figures,
and details of those figures (such as postures and
gestures). Nobody doing this for images in general,
rather than for one artist’s work, is going to do it in
a way so responsive to the motifs of any individual
artist’s work; and it is in any case not the sort of
work that we see as part of digital-library projects.
In order to make the initial case for devoting time
and money to this sort of indexing, which is not an
automatic process, it is still necessary to overcome
the focus on data—though there are clearly valuable
results to show from such indexing, so the case is
readily made. But there is also the problem that our
work as editors in creating and communicating an
understanding of the material is still seen as extra-
neous on this model.
There is another model that I consider very
important, and that eventually should become
prominent, though it is technologically rather diffi-
cult right now. This is the model of interactive,
collaborative work on texts that has been built up
during several decades of research in the hypertext
world.21 In this model, you no longer have the sharp
division between producers and consumers of infor-
mation, which is the way the World Wide Web
wound up working (though it is not the way it was
designed), and which we tend to wind up imagining
as a stream of data flowing in one direction; an inter-
active and collaborative edition would instead be
open to incorporating work from everyone who is
interested in contributing. There are naturally going
to be difficulties in learning how to do this best,
since, for example, you do probably want to keep
collaborators from altering the text of your tran-
scriptions of witnesses unless they know what they
are doing. Getting a system like this to work on a
global scale mainly requires better software; it is
unfortunately one of those possibilities that we are
well equipped to think about and implement,
but not well enough funded in most cases to try.
(One current source of information about these
questions from a technical point of view is the web
site for the IETF working group on World Wide
Web Distributed Authoring and Versioning at
http://www.ics.uci.edu/ejw/authoring/.) And
beyond that it requires changes in the way people
think about their work: collaboration remains an
unusual way of working in most humanities fields,
and one often regarded with some suspicion.
These are important approaches but they have to
do more with changing our ways of thinking about
collections of texts—about our relationship to
them, and how we create and work with them—
than with really thinking about textual matters;
indeed, these are approaches that do not have a
clear requirement for a basis in sound texts.
8 The Model of Criticism
Another model that is worth considering, to get us
around the limitations of the access model, is the
model of criticism. That is, instead of saying that we
are here as editors to give readers access to texts, we
might instead represent what we do as providing
critical points of view on those texts, with their
actual contents thrown in.
Of course, I am aware that critical work is often
seen as nearly antithetical to editorial work.
J. Lavagnino
72 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
The problem of the two audiences that I have
described is in its social dimension quite familiar,
in the way that two largely distinct groups of people
seem to have been engaged in editing and in criti-
cism in recent decades. And the world of criticism
does emit some discussion of textual scholarship
now and then, but all too often the message is that
editors ought to be more like critics, without any real
thought about how that change would affect the
activity of editing except by entirely replacing it
with criticism. There may, of course, be very good
reasons to try and keep criticism and textual scholar-
ship separate: Jerome McGann made a strong argu-
ment in ‘The Monks and the Giants’ that our ideas
of the relationship between the two fields ought to
be different, that textual scholarship ought to be
thought of as fundamental to interpretation, rather
than as preliminary; but he did not suggest that we
ought to abolish the distinction.22
Still, as I argued earlier in this essay, it is not the
case that what an edition does is merely informa-
tional; there are points being made that might as
well be called critical, even in the ‘textual’ parts.
There are really only these observable differences
between current editorial and critical practice, and
even these are only general tendencies rather than
strict rules:
 In an edition, there is more space devoted to what
is already known.
Many facts about the nature and verbal contents
of the witnesses must be included, for example,
no matter how often they have been published
before.
 An edition offers a practical realization of some of
its ideas about the establisment or presentation of
the text.
A critical (or textual) essay can discuss how a
work ought to be edited, but actually doing an
edition often reveals unanticipated problems or
choices.
 Critical writing is more inclined to make
claims about the interpretive significance of the
approach being taken.
Editions typically make a case for their editorial
approach, but there is continuing nervousness
about what role interpretations of the text
ought to play in editorial work.
 Accuracy about facts does not matter as much in
criticism.
Observation reveals this to be true, even though
in principle it should not be.
A briefer statement of these points might be: edi-
tions focus on facts and criticism focuses on argu-
ments, but facts and arguments are a part of both
forms. We should not mimic the occasionally cava-
lier treatment of facts in criticism, but giving more
prominence to our arguments would serve to make
it clearer that we are making arguments, and would
give us a better opportunity to make the case for the
importance of our understanding of texts.
Critical projects also have inherent limits to their
scope, and so keeping a project from growing end-
lessly is much easier if particular critical goals are
articulated, rather than the generalized goal of pro-
viding data for any reasonable critical approach. An
infinite number of facts is available for inclusion; a
critical project involves a focusing of attention on
certain kinds of things. And this approach also repre-
sents an improvement in how criticism is done: cri-
ticism has been hampered by print as much as
editing has, since there is no reason not to include
the work you are talking about in a critical publica-
tion, except that in print it would be expensive.23
This shift of focus may appear to abandon one of
our great advantages, that of being able to promise
direct access to the author, or at least to certain
works of the author. But the effect of the rise of
digital libraries is to diminish the value of that func-
tion: either it appears that the data is available
already, because the difference between what we
have to offer and what a digital library offers is
not widely understood, or it leads to demands for
more data rather than more understanding.
9 Examples in Current Practice
There are existing editions in various forms that
have shifted their focus already, and that suggest
productive directions for new electronic editions.
Here are three varieties:
 The archive based on critical aims.
Among the existing editorial projects that pres-
ent themselves more as archives rather than as
Access
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 73
conventional editions, there are some that have
specific critical aims in view and not just the
accumulation of a particular body of material.
Two well-known projects of this sort are those
focused on Chaucer and on Dante Gabriel
Rossetti.24 It would be possible to describe
these just in terms of access: both have as one
large component the publication of images and
transcriptions of all the primary sources for the
works in question. Leaving aside other aspects of
the projects that go in different directions,
though, there is in both cases an explicit inten-
tion not to assemble evidence and let others
make of it what they will, but instead to work
towards particular understandings of the
authors—though they are understandings that
are quite different in the two cases. The
Chaucer edition seeks to establish the facts
about the textual transmission of The
Canterbury Tales with an eye towards establish-
ing a new edited text of the work; the Rossetti
edition is instead concerned to establish the
importance of the separate manifestations of
Rossetti’s work and not make the usual moves
towards reducing the number of texts and
versions.
 The illustrated essay.
If you are not obliged to compress your discus-
sion, then an account of text production can be
very interesting. This is one of the lessons of the
Toronto school of bibliographical writing that
includes such writers as Randy McLeod,
Random Cloud, and Random Clod; even apart
from their new thinking about texts, their writing
is important because it contains descriptions of
text-production processes that are far more effec-
tive and accessible than most other accounts in
existence.25 There are other examples available
that illustrate the value of fuller accounts. I
have mentioned the problem that West’s edition
of Sister Carrie has, in that its textual discussion
gives a good impression of West’s position but
not so good an idea, for the common reader, of
the nature of the materials; even in the best tex-
tual discussions this tends to happen, because
they have the oddly abstract quality that can
result from long prose descriptions of
mechanical operations. But a few years after his
edition West published another account of the
composition and publishing history of Sister
Carrie, in a book called A Sister Carrie
Portfolio, which recounts the textual history of
the novel at length and with many pictures, to
show samples from the text at every stage and
illustrating what all the different agents involved
were doing.26 You need the edition for the text
and for notes on the textual details, but this
portfolio is actually better if you want an over-
view or general impression of the textual history,
because it can give you a much more concrete
idea of what happened than prose can. The
account still follows West’s view of events,
though this seems to me inescapable; but it is
much easier to disagree with the argument in
this form, since the nature of the sources is so
much more clear.
 The analytical display.
The attitude to complex apparatus in English-
language editing has often been negative, since
the attacks on it from Lewis Mumford in 1968
and Philip Gaskell in 1978.27 But if a complex
apparatus is just one aspect of an edition, and
not the only way of getting at some of the texts,
then the picture is different. J. C. C. Mays’s edi-
tion in print form of Coleridge’s poems is an
example of one possible approach: his edition
offers both a Variorum Text that shows readings
from all relevant documents in an in-line pre-
sentation, and a Reading Text that prints one
or two versions of each poem selected from
among the numerous possibilities.28 This takes
a lot of space: six volumes for what a conven-
tional presentation could easily fit into one; but
the variorum text is designed to support a study
of Coleridge’s work in revising his poems, some-
thing that conventional apparatus does not sup-
port well. This edition is not simple to use, but a
presentation of a complex textual situation
cannot be simple. And there is still a reading
text, so that it is possible to read versions of
the poems without the mediation of the edition’s
variorum presentation.
These projects illustrate some of the possibilities
for digital editions that can justify their existence in
J. Lavagnino
74 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
a form distinct from that of digital libraries. The
effort and expense required to create digital editions
will be hard to justify if they do not have some
point to make that is quite specific to the texts
involved; the argument of simple comprehensive-
ness is perilous because digital-library approaches
can always generate more data. But the edition
that includes the relevant body of information and
also offers specialized ways of studying it can give
scholars and readers an experience worth having.
Notes
1 See also Williams, W. P. and Baker, W. (2001). Caveat
Lector. English Books 1475–1700 and the Electronic
Age. Analytical and Enumerative Bibliography, NS
12.1: 1–29, for a discussion of problems with more
recent compilations.
2 See, in particular, chapter 10 of Shillingsburg, P. L.
(1996). Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age, 3rd
edn. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
3 Reiman, D. H. (1987). Romantic Texts and Contexts.
Columbia: University of Missouri Press.
4 Dane, J. A. (1996) Perfect order and perfected order:
the evidence from press-variants of early seventeenth-
century quartos. PBSA, 90: 272–320.
5 Dekker, T. (195361). The Dramatic Works of Thomas
Dekker. Bowers, F. (ed.), 4 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
6 As Lester E. Barber observed, Bowers’s later edition
of Marlowe no longer troubled to explain the appara-
tus in this way, and indeed referred readers to a sepa-
rate publication rather than explaining it at
all. See Barber, L. E. (1974). A recent edition of
Marlowe. Research Opportunities in Renaissance
Drama, 17: 17–24.
7 Frost, R. (1969). The Poetry of Robert Frost. E. C.
Lathem (ed.). New York: Holt; Gibbon, E. (1994). The
History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
Womersley, D. (ed.), 3 vols. London: Penguin.
8 Chaucer, G. (1996). The Wife of Bath’s Prologue on CD-
ROM. Robinson, P. (ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
9 Dreiser, T. (1982). American Diaries. 1902–1926.
Riggio, T. P. (ed.), West, J. L. W. III (textual ed.),
Westlake, N. M. (general ed.). Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, p. 453.
Unfortunately, a similar example in the Pennsylvania
edition of An Amateur Laborer has an error: the page
and line number given in the quoted example are
different from those in the explanation of the example
[An Amateur Laborer (1983), Dowell, R. W. (ed.),
West, J. L. W. III (textual ed.), Westlake, N. M. (gen-
eral ed.). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press, p. 201]. I used this book rather than American
Diaries as my example when presenting this paper in
Toronto in 1997, but did not notice the error; Randall
McLeod and Peter Shillingsburg pointed it out to me.
10 Boydston, J. A. (1991). In praise of apparatus. TEXT,
5: 9.
11 Dewey, J. (1997). Emerson—The Philosopher of
Democracy. In Boydston, J. A. (ed.), The Middle
Works, 1899–1924: Vol. 3, 1903–06. Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, pp. 184–92.
12 For more on why the Dekker edition took that form,
and a selection of comments from reviewers of the
edition, see Tanselle, G. T. (1993). The life and
work of Fredson Bowers. Studies in Bibliography, 46:
51–3.
13 Howells, W. D. (1979). The Quality of Mercy. James P.
Elliott and Nordloh, D. J. (ed.). Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
14 Ford, F. M. (2002). No Enemy. Paul Skinner (ed.).
Manchester: Carcanet.
15 Dreiser, T. (1981). Sister Carrie. Berkey, J. C. and
Winters, A. M. (historical eds), West, J. L. W. III
(textual ed.), Westlake, N. M. (general ed.).
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.
577–8.
16 Maguire, L. E. (1996). Shakespearean Suspect Texts:
The ‘Bad’ Quartos and Their Contexts. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
17 See Laufer, R. (1988) E´dition critique synoptique sur
e´cran: l’exemple des Maximes de La Rochefoucauld. In
Catach, N. (ed.), Les e´ditions critiques: Proble`mes tech-
niques et e´ditoriaux. Actes de la Table ronde internatio-
nale de 1984. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, pp. 115–25.
18 Chartier, R. (1994). Libraries without walls. In
Cochrane, L. G. (trans.), The Order of Books:
Readers, Authors, and Libraries in Europe between the
Fourteenth and Eighteenth Centuries. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, p. 88.
19 Chartier, 74, 86.
20 Blake, W. (1996–). The William Blake Archive. In
Eaves, M., Essick, R. and Viscomi, J. (eds),
Kirschenbaum, M. G. (technical ed.). http://www.
blakearchive.org (accessed 28 November 1997).
21 See Nelson, T. H. (1992). Literary Machines: The
Report on, and of, Project Xanadu Concerning Word
Processing, Electronic Publishing, Hypertext,
Thinkertoys, Tomorrow’s Intellectual Revolution, and
Access
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 75
Certain Other Topics Including Knowledge, Education
and Freedom, 93.1 edn. Sausalito, CA: Mindful Press;
Bolter, J. D. (1991). Writing Space: The Computer,
Hypertext, and the History of Writing. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; Landow, G. (1992).
Hypertext: The Convergence of Contemporary Critical
Theory and Technology. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press; and Nielsen, J. (1995). Multimedia
and Hypertext: the Internet and Beyond. Boston: AP
Professional.
22 McGann, J. J. (ed.) (1985). The Monks and the
Giants: Textual and Bibliographical Studies and the
Interpretation of Literary Works. In Textual
Criticism and Literary Interpretation. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 180–99.
23 David Greetham has pointed out a further practical
reason to stress the critical dimension of scholarly
editing: in the current state of copyright law in the
United States, legal protection of an editor’s work is
more certain if it is presented as interpretive work
rather than as the accurate compilation of textual
facts. See Greetham, D. (1996). The telephone direc-
tory and Dr. Seuss: scholarly editing after Feist versus
rural telephone. Studies in the Literary Imagination, 29:
53–74.
24 Chaucer. Wife of Bath’s Prologue on CD-ROM.
Robinson (ed.); Rossetti, D. G. (2000–). The
Complete Writings and Pictures of Dante Gabriel
Rossetti: A Hypermedia Research Archive. McGann,
J. J. (ed.). http://www.rossettiarchive.org/ (accessed 9
April 2002).
25 Clod, R. (1991). Information upon Information.
TEXT, 5: 241–81; Cloud, R. (1994). FIAT fLUX. In
McLeod, R. (ed.), Crisis in Editing: Texts of the
English Renaissance: Papers given at the twenty-fourth
annual Conference on Editorial Problems. University of
Toronto, 4–5 November 1988. New York: AMS Press,
pp. 61–172.
26 West, J. L. W. III. (1985). A Sister Carrie Portfolio.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
27 Mumford, L. (1973). Emerson’s Journals. In
Interpretations and Forecasts: 1922–1972. New York:
Harcourt, pp. 103–09; originally published as
‘Emerson behind Barbed Wire,’ New York Review of
Books (18 January 1968), pp. 3–5; Gaskell, P. (1978).
From Writer to Reader: Studies in Editorial Method.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
28 Coleridge, S. T. (2001). Poetical Works. Mays, J. C. C.
(ed.), 6 vols. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
J. Lavagnino
76 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
