
This essay was written in 1997. It has not been sig-
nificantly updated but reflects that particular
moment in the debate on electronic text.
1 Introduction
The last decade or so has proven to be a heady time
for editors of digital editions. With the maturation
of the digital medium and its application to an ever
increasing variety of cultural objects, digital scholars
have been led to consider their theory and practice
in fundamental terms. The questions they have
asked have ranged from the nature of the editorial
enterprise to issues of academic economics and pol-
itics; from problems of textual theory to questions
of mise-en-page and navigation: what is an Edition?
What kinds of objects can it contain? How should it
be used? Must it be critical? Must it have a reading
text? How should it be organized and displayed? Can
intellectual responsibility be shared among editors
and users? Can it be shared across generations of
editors and users? While some of these questions
clearly are related to earlier debates in print theory
and practice, others involve aspects of the production
of editions not relevant to or largely taken for granted
by previous generations of print-based editors.
The answers that have developed to these ques-
tions at times have involved radical departures from
earlier norms (though see Karlsson and Malm, 2004
for an opposing view). The flexibility inherent to the
electronic medium, for example, has encouraged
editors to produce editions that users can manipu-
late interactively, displaying or suppressing differ-
ent types of readings, annotation, and editorial
approaches, or even navigate in rudimentary 3D
virtual reality. The relatively low production, stor-
age, and publication costs associated with digital
publication, similarly, have encouraged the develop-
ment of the archive as the de facto standard of the
genre: users of digital editions now expect to have
access to all the evidence used by the editors in
the construction of their texts (assuming, indeed,
that editors actually have provided some kind of
mediated text): full-text transcriptions, high-quality
facsimiles of all known witnesses, and tools for
building alternate views of the underlying data.
Correspondence:
Daniel Paul O’Donnell,
Department of English,
University of Lethbridge,
4401 University Drive W,
Lethbridge AB,
Canada T1K 3M4.
E-mail:
daniel.odonnell@uleth.ca
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
113
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn039
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
There have been experiments in editing non-
textual objects (Reed Kline, 2001; Foys, 2003), in
producing image-based editions of textual objects
(Kiernan, 1999/2003), and in recreating digitally
the aspects of the sensual experience users might
have had in consulting the original objects (British
Library; for a discussion, see O’Donnell, 2005b).
There have been editions that radically decenter the
reading text (e.g. Robinson, 1996), and editions
that force users to consult their material using an
editorially imposed conceit (Reed Kline, 2001).
Even elements carried over from traditional print
practice have come in for experimentation and rede-
sign: the representation of annotation, glossaries, or
textual variation, for example, are rarely the same in
any two electronic editions, even in editions pub-
lished by the same press (O’Donnell, 2005b, § 5).1
Much of the impetus behind this theoretical and
practical experimentation has come from develop-
ments in the wider field of textual and editorial
scholarship, particularly work of the book histor-
ians, new philologists, and social textual critics
who came into prominence in the decade preceding
the publication of the earliest modern digital editor-
ial projects (e.g. McGann, 1983/1992; McKenzie,
1984/1999; Cerquiglini, 1989; Nicols, 1990; for a
review see Greetham, 1994, pp. 339–343). Despite
significant differences in emphasis and detail,
these approaches are united by two main character-
istics: a broad interest in the editorial representation
of variance as a fundamental feature of textual prod-
uction, transmission, and reception; and opposi-
tion to earlier, intentionalist, approaches that
privileged the reconstruction of a hypothetical,
usually single, authorial text over the many actual
texts used and developed by historical authors,
scribes, publishers, readers, and scholars. Working
largely before the revolution in Humanities
Computing brought on by the development of
structural markup languages and popularity of the
Internet (O’Donnell, 2004), these scholars neverthe-
less often expressed themselves in technological
terms, calling for changes in the way editions were
printed and organized (see, for example, the call
for a loose leaf edition of Chaucer in Pearsall,
1985) or pointing to the then largely incipient prom-
ise of the new digital media for representing texts
as multi-forms (e.g. McGann, 1995; Shillingsburg,
1996).
A second, complementary, impetus for this
experimentation has been the sense that the digital
editorial practice is, or ought to be, fundamentally
different from and even opposed to that of print.
This view is found to a greater or lesser extent in
both early speculative accounts of the coming revo-
lution (e.g. McGann, 1995; the essays collected in
Finneran, 1996 and Landow and Delaney, 1993) and
subsequent, more sober and experienced discussions
of whether digital practice has lived up to its initial
promise (e.g. Robinson, 2004, 2005, 2006; Karlsson
and Malm, 2004). It is characterized both by a sense
that many intellectual conventions found in print
editions are at their root primarily technological in
origin, and that the new digital media offer what is
in effect a tabula rasa upon which digital editors can
develop new and better editorial approaches and
conventions to accommodate the problems raised
by textual theorists of the 1980s and 1990s.
Of course in some cases, this sense that digital
practice is different from print is justified. Organi-
zational models, such as the Intellectual Commons
or Wiki have no easy equivalent in print publi-
cation. Technological advances in our ability to
produce, manipulate, and store images cheaply,
likewise, have significantly changed what editors
and users expect editions to tell them about the
primary sources. The ability to present research
interactively has opened up rhetorical possibilities
for the representation of textual scholarship difficult
or impossible to realize in the printed codex.
But the sense that digital practice is fundamen-
tally different from print has been also at times
more reactionary than revolutionary. If digital the-
orists have been quick to recognize the ways in
which some aspects of print editorial theory and
practice have been influenced by the technological
limitations of the printed page, they have been also
at times too quick to see other, more intellectually
significant aspects of print practice as technological
quirks. Textual criticism in its modern form has a
history that is now nearly 450 years old (Greetham,
1994, p. 313); in its general desire to produce
‘better’ texts (however ‘better’ is defined at the
moment in question), it is ‘the most ancient of
D. P. O’Donnell
114 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
scholarly activities in the West’ with a history
stretching back to the end of the sixth century
BCE (Greetham, 1994, p. 297). The development
of the critical edition over this period has been as
much an intellectual as a technological process.
While the limitations of the printed page have
undoubtedly dictated the form of many features
of the traditional critical edition, centuries of
refinement—by trial-and-error as well as outright
invention—also have produced conventions that
transcend the specific medium for which they
were developed. In such cases, digital editors may
be able to improve upon these conventions by
recognizing the (often unexpressed) underlying
theory and taking advantage of the superior flexi-
bility and interactivity of the digital medium to
improve their representation. But in order to
improve on the work of our print predecessors,
we need first to understand what they were up to.
2 Expert knowledge and
the critical text
Perhaps no area of traditional print editorial prac-
tice has come in for more practical and theoretical
criticism than the provision of synthetic, stereotypi-
cally eclectic, reading texts.2 Of course this criticism
is not solely the result of developments in the digital
medium: suspicion of claims to definitiveness and
privilege is, after all, perhaps the most characteristic
feature of post-structuralist literary theory. It is the
case, however, that digital editors have taken to
avoiding the critical text with a gusto that far out-
strips that of their print colleagues. It is still not
unusual to find a print edition with some kind of
critical text; the provision of similarly critical texts
in digital editions is far more unusual. While most
digital projects do provide some kind of top-level
reading text, few make any strong claims about this
text’s definitiveness. More commonly, as in the
early, ground breaking editions of the Canterbury
Tales Project (CTP), the intention of the guide text
is, at best, to provide readers with some way of
organizing the diversity, without any direct claim
to authority (Robinson n.d.):
We began . . . work [on the CTP] with the
intention of trying to recreate a better reading
text of the Canterbury Tales. As the work
progressed, our aims have changed. Rather
than trying to create a better reading text,
we now see our aim as helping readers to
read these many texts. Thus from what
we provide, readers can read the transcripts,
examine the manuscripts behind the trans-
cripts, see what different readings are available
at any one word, and determine the signifi-
cance of a particular reading occurring in a
particular group of manuscripts. Perhaps
this aim is less grand than making a definitive
text; but it may also be more useful.
There are some exceptions to this general
tendency—both in the form of digital editions
that are focused around the provision of editorially
mediated critical texts (e.g. McGillivray, 1997) and
projects, such as the Piers Plowman Electronic
Archive (PPEA) that hope ultimately to derive
such texts from material collected in their archives.
But even here, I think it is fair to say that the provi-
sion of a synthetic, critical, text is not what most
digital editors consider to be the really interesting
thing about their projects. What distinguishes the
computer from the codex and makes digital editing
such an exciting enterprise is precisely the ability the
new medium gives us for collecting, cataloguing,
and navigating massive amounts of raw informa-
tion: transcriptions of every witness, collations of
every textual difference, facsimiles of every page of
every primary source. Even when the ultimate goal is
the production of a critically mediated text, the abil-
ity to archive remains distracting.3
In some areas of study, this emphasis on collec-
tion over synthesis is perhaps not a bad thing. Texts
like Piers Plowman, the Canterbury Tales, and,
in print, Hamlet and Het achterhuis (The Diary of
Anne Frank) have such complex textual histories
that they rarely have been archived in any form
useful to the average scholar; in such cases,
indeed, the historical tendency—seen from our
post-structuralist perspective—has been towards
over-synthesis. In these cases, the most popular pre-
vious print editions were put together by editors
with strong ideas about the nature of the textual
history and/or authorial intentions of the works
in question. Their textual histories, too, have
Back to the future
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 115
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
tended to be too complex for easy presentation
in print format (e.g. Manly and Rickert, 1940).
Readers with only a passing interest in the textual
history of these texts have been encouraged implic-
itly or explicitly to leave the question in the hands
of experts.
The area in which I work—Old English textual
studies—has not suffered from this tendency in
recent memory. Editions of Old English texts
historically have tended to be under- rather than
over-determined—even in print. In most cases,
this is excused by the paucity of surviving witnesses.
Most Old English poems (about 97% of the known
canon), for example, survive in unique manuscripts
(Sisam, 1953; Jabbour, 1968; O’Donnell, 1996a).
Even when there is more primary material, Anglo-
Saxon editors work in a culture that resists attempts
at textual synthesis or interpretation, preferring
parallel-text or single-witness manuscript editions
whenever feasible, and limiting editorial interpreta-
tion to the expansion of abbreviations, word divi-
sion, and metrical layout—or, in a student edition,
perhaps, the normalization of certain unusual lin-
guistic and orthographic features. One result of
this is that print practice in Anglo-Saxon studies
over the last century or so has anticipated to a
great extent many of the aspects that in other per-
iods distinguish digital editions from their print
predecessors.
The scholarly history of Cædmon’s Hymn, a text I
have recently edited for the Society of Early English
and Norse Electronic Texts series (O’Donnell,
2005a), is a perfect example of how this tendency
manifests itself in Old English studies. Cædmon’s
Hymn is the most textually complicated poem of
the Anglo-Saxon period, and, for a variety of histor-
ical, literary, and scholarly reasons, among the most
important: it is probably the first recorded example
of sustained poetry in any Germanic language; it is
the only Old English poem for which any detailed
account of its contemporary reception survives;
it is found in four recensions and twenty-one
medieval manuscripts—a textual history which can
be matched in numbers, but not complexity, by only
one other vernacular Anglo-Saxon poem, Bede’s
Death Song (the most recent discussion of these
issues is O’Donnell, 2005a).
The poem has also been well studied. Since
the 1930s, published semi-diplomatic transcriptions
have existed of all known witnesses (Dobbie, 1937).4
Facsimiles of the earliest manuscripts of the
poem (dating from the mid-eighth century) have
been available from various sources since the begin-
ning of the twentieth century (e.g. Dobiache-
Rojdestvensky, 1928), and were supplemented in
the early 1990s by a complete collection of high-
quality black-and-white photos collected in Fred
C. Robinson and E.G. Stanley’s Old English Poems
from Many Sources (1991). Articles and books on
the poem’s transmission and textual history have
appeared quite regularly for over 100 years and
the poem has been at the centre of most debates
about the nature of textual transmission in
Anglo-Saxon England since at least the 1950s.
Taken together, the result of this activity has
been the production of what, in everything except
medium of production and distribution, can be
understood as a fairly avant garde digital edition
avant la lettre: a lightly mediated, witness- and
facsimile-based archive that, constructed over a
number of generations by independent groups of
scholars, even anticipates several recent calls for
the development of a new model of collective,
multi-project and multi-generational digital edito-
rial scholarship (e.g. Ore, 2004; Robinson, 2005).
The poem’s print scholarly history anticipates
contemporary digital practice in another way as
well: until recently, Cædmon’s Hymn had never
been the subject of a modern critical textual edition.
The last century has seen the publication of a couple
of student editions of the poem and some specia-
lized reconstructions of one of the more corrupt
recensions (Wuest 1906; Smith, 1938/1978;
O’Donnell, 1996b; Cavill, 2000)—but no critical
works that have attempted to encapsulate and trans-
mit in textual form what is actually known about
the poem’s transmission and recensional history.
The closest thing to a standard edition for most
of the last 100 years, two versions of the poem
edited by Elliot Van Kirk Dobbie for the Anglo-
Saxon Poetic Records (ASPR) (Dobbie, 1942), actu-
ally ignored the editor’s own earlier work on the
poem’s textual history. Thus, in his earlier, never
renounced, study of the poem, The Manuscripts of
D. P. O’Donnell
116 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Cædmon’s Hymn (Dobbie, 1937), Dobbie argued
that the Hymn developed along something like the
following lines, with an early Northumbrian divi-
sion between versions of the poem reading aelda
or eordu in line 5b that was subsequently repro-
duced in later West-Saxon manuscripts (Fig. 1).5
In his actual edition (Dobbie, 1942), however,
Dobbie reproduced two hypothetical recon-
structions using witnesses grouped by dialect: a
Northumbrian text based on the combined readings
of manuscripts M, L, Di, and P1, and a West-Saxon
text based on readings from witnesses to the Z and
Æ recensions and the manuscripts Ld1 and Hr.
In doing so, Dobbie created texts substantively
different from those found in any surviving witness
and obscured the readings he himself considered to
be fundamental to the poem’s recensional division.
The problem with this approach—and with the
history of Cædmon’s Hymn in Anglo-Saxon scholar-
ship—should be clear enough. On the one hand the
poem’s textual history is, by Anglo-Saxon
standards, quite complex and the subject of intense
debate by professional textual scholars. On the
other, the failure until recently to provide any
kind of critical text representing the various posi-
tions in the debate has all but hidden the signifi-
cance of this research—and its implications for
work on other aspects of the Hymn—from the
general reader. Instead of being able to take advan-
tage of the expert knowledge acquired by editors
and textual scholars of the poem over the last
100 years of modern Cædmon’s Hymn scholarship,
readers instead have been forced either to go back to
the raw materials and construct their own texts over
and over again or rely on a standard edition that
misrepresents its own editor’s considered views of
the poem’s textual history.
This is not an efficient use of these readers’ time.
As Kevin Kiernan has argued, the textual history
of Cædmon’s Hymn is not a spectacle for casual
observers (Kiernan, 1990), and most people who
come to study Cædmon’s Hymn are not interested
in collating transcriptions, deciphering facsimiles,
and weighing options for grouping the surviving
witnesses: they want to study its sources and analo-
gues, its composition and reception, its prosody,
language, place in the canon, significance in the
development of Anglo-Saxon Christianity, or use-
fulness as an index in discussions of the posi-
tion of women in Anglo-Saxon society—in other
words, all the other things we do with texts when
we are not studying their transmission. What these
readers want—and certainly what I want when
I consult an edition of a work I am studying for
reasons other than its textual history—is a text
that is accurate, readable, and hopefully based on
clearly defined and well-explained criteria. They
want, in other words, to be able to take advantage
of the expert knowledge of those responsible for
putting together the text they are consulting. If
they don’t like what they see, or if the approach
taken is not what they need for their research,
then they may try to find an edition that is better
suited to their particular needs. But they will not—
except in extreme cases I suspect—actually want
to duplicate the effort required to put together a
top-quality edition.
3 Print convention and
database theory
The failure of the print editors of Cædmon’s Hymn
over the last 100 years to provide a critical editorial
Fig. 1 Reproduction of stemma of Cædmon’s Hymn
from Dobbie (1937)
Back to the future
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 117
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
account of their actual knowledge of their poem is
very much the exception that proves the rule: for the
provision of this kind of expert knowledge is an area
in which digital editors generally are much poorer
than their print predecessors. This is ironic both
because the encoding and dissemination of expert
knowledge is in other fields of computer science a
principal preoccupation, and because traditional
print editorial conventions already provide a
robust and sophisticated model for how this knowl-
edge could be organized. As digital editors, we can
improve on this practice both because it has
been developed in the past for the most part by
trial-and-error rather than explicit intellectual
modelling, and because computers actually are
better suited than codices for implementing many
aspects of the print model. In coming to define
our work for a large part in reaction to print edi-
tions, however, we have failed to recognize some of
the most promising areas opened for us by the new
media. Digital editing as a discipline will only truly
come of age when it recognizes the solidity of the
foundation it has been given to build upon.
Perhaps the most important thing to recognize
about traditional print editorial practice is its
intellectual efficiency. At a conceptual level, print
editorial conventions developed over the last several
100 years form an almost textbook example of the
parsimonious organization of information about
texts and witnesses. While there are some techno-
logical and conventional limitations to the way this
information is used and presented in its codex form,
it is difficult if not impossible to come up with a
theoretically more flexible and efficient rhetorical
organization.
Demonstrating this requires us to make a brief
excursion into questions of database theory and
design. Most contemporary databases are built on
a relational data model.6 The goal of relational data-
base design is to generate a set of relationship sche-
mas that allows us to store information without
unnecessary redundancy, yet also allows us to
retrieve information easily (Silberschatz et al. 2006,
p. 263). The relational model organizes information
into 2D tables, each row of which represents a rela-
tionship among associated bits of information.
Complex data commonly require the use of more
than one set of relations or tables. The goal is to
avoid complex redundancies: in a well-designed
relational database, no piece of information that
logically follows from any other appears more
than once.7
The process used to eliminate redundancies and
dependencies in relational database design is known
as normalization. When data has been organized so
that it is free of all such inefficiencies, it is usually in
third normal form. How this works can be best seen
through an example. The following invoice is from a
hypothetical book store (adapted from Krishna,
1992, p. 32):
Describing this information in relational terms is
in this case a three-step process. The first step
involves identifying what it is that is to be included
in the data model by providing explicit names for
information implicit in the document’s structure
(parentheses are used to indicate information that
can occur more than once on the invoice):
Invoice: invoice_number, customer_id, cus-
tomer_name, customer_address, (ISBN, author,
title, price, quantity, item_total), grand_total
Invoice Number JJSmith0001
Customer ID: JJS01
Name: Jane J. Smith
Address: 323 Fifteenth Street S., Lethbridge, Alberta T1K 5X3.
ISBN Author Title Price Quantity Item Total
0-670-03151-8 Pinker, Stephen The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature $35.00 1 $35.00
0-8122-3745-5 Burrus, Virginia The Sex Lives of Saints: An Erotics of Ancient Hagiography $25.00 2 $50.00
0-7136-0389-5 Dix, Dom Gregory The Shape of the Liturgy $55.00 1 $55.00
Grand total $140.00
D. P. O’Donnell
118 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Repeating information in this document about
the actual books sold (ISBN, author, title, price,
quantity, item_total) is then removed and
placed in a second table, whose connection to the
first is indicated by the value of the invoice_number
key:
Invoice: invoice_number, customer_id, custo-
mer_name, customer_address, grand_total
Invoice_Item: invoice_number, ISBN, author,
title, price, quantity, item_total
The final step involves removing functional
dependencies and redundancies within these two
tables. In this database, for example, information
about a book’s author, title and item_price are func-
tionally dependent on its ISBN: for each ISBN, there
is only one possible author, title, and item_price.
Likewise customer_id is associated with only one
customer_name and customer_address. These
dependencies are eliminated by placing the depen-
dent material in two new tables, Customer and
Book, which are linked to rest of the data by the
customer_id and ISBN keys. This leaves us with
four sets of relations, none of which can be
broken down any further, at which point, the data
are said to be in third normal form:
Invoice: invoice_number, customer_id,
grand_total
Invoice_Item: invoice_number, ISBN, quan-
tity, item_total
Customer: customer_id, customer_name,
customer_address
Book: ISBN, author, title, price
The normalization process becomes interesting
when one applies it to the type of information edi-
tors commonly collect about textual witnesses. The
following, for example, is a simplified version of a
sheet I used to record basic information about each
manuscript witness to Cædmon’s Hymn:
The sheet has what are essentially fields for the
manuscript sigil, date, scribe, location, and, of
course, the text itself—something that can be seen,
on analogy with our book store invoice, as a repeat-
ing set of categories: lines, words, morphemes, and
the like. Additional information used in editing
medieval texts, though not typically included on
an informal sheet like this, includes the relationship
between individual readings in this manuscript to
some kind of canonical reference system, glossary
and grammatical information, and collations.
As with our hypothetical invoice, it is possible to
place this data in normal form. The first step, once
again, is to extract the relevant relations from the
manuscript sheet and, in this case, the unstated,
expert knowledge an editor typically brings to his
or her task. This leads at the very least to the follow-
ing set of relations:8
Manuscript: shelf_mark, date, scribe, location,
(ms_instance, canonical_reading, dictionary_
form, grammatical_information, translation)
Extracting the repeating information about indi-
vidual readings, leaves us with two tables linked by
the key shelf_mark:
Manuscript: shelf_mark, date, scribe, location
Text: shelf_mark, ms_instance, canonical_
reading, dictionary_form, grammatical_infor-
mation, translation
And, placing the material in third normal form,
at least one more:
Manuscript: shelf_mark, date, scribe, location
Text: shelf_mark, ms_instance,
canonical_reading
Glossary: canonical_reading, dictionary_form,
grammatical_information, translation
The significant thing about this process is the
resemblance the final normalized arrangement
Shelf-Mark: B1 Cambridge, Corpus Christi College 41
Date: s. xi-1
Scribe: Second scribe of the main Old English text.
Location: Copied as part of the main text of the Old English translation of the Historia ecclesiastica (p. 332 [f. 161v]. line 6)
Recension: West-Saxon eorðan recension
Text: Nuweherigan sculon heofonrices weard metodes mihte &hismod ge Þanc weorc wuldor godes [etc]
Back to the future
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 119
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
bears to the stereotypical structure of a traditional
print-based critical edition: a section with biblio-
graphic (and other) information about the text
and associated witnesses, a section relating manu-
script readings to editorially privileged forms, and a
section containing abstract lexical and grammatical
information about words in the abstract text.
Moreover, although familiarity and the use of nar-
rative descriptions can obscure this fact in practice,
much of the information contained in these sections
in traditional print editions actually is tabular in
form: in structural terms, glossaries are best under-
stood as highly structured lists in which each item
contains similar material in a similar order: lemma,
grammatical information, translation, instances; not
surprisingly dictionaries were among the first genres
to be modelled in structural markup languages like
(S)GML (see Elliot, 2000 for the Oxford English
Dictionary). Bibliographical discussions, too, often
consist of what are in effect, structurally organized
lists: shelf-mark, bibliography, provenance, etc.9
4 The critical text as database
view
There is one place, however, in which this presenta-
tion of the data model underlying traditional print
practice is misleading: the representation of the crit-
ical text itself. For while it is possible to see the how
the other sections of a print critical edition
(including the apparatus variorum) might be ren-
dered in tabular form, the critical text itself—the
place where editors present the synthetic reading
text that is the result of their editorial efforts—is
never presented in anything resembling the non-
hierarchical, tabular form a relational model would
lead us to expect. Indeed the essential point of the
editorial text—and the source of post-structural
criticism of the approach—is the elimination of
non-hierarchical choice: in constructing synthetic
texts, print editors impose order on the textual evi-
dence by privileging a single reading at each col-
lation point in their editions, relegating the rest—
and even then only a sample—to appearance in
small type at the bottom of the page in the critical
apparatus. Although it is the defining feature of the
print critical edition, the critical text itself would
appear to be the only part that is not directly part
of the underlying, and extremely efficient, data
model developed through the centuries.
This does not invalidate my larger argument,
however. Because we build databases precisely in
order to acquire this ability to select and organize
raw data. If the critical text in a print edition is not
actually a database itself, it is a database view—that
is to say a ‘window on the database through which
data required for a particular user or application can
be accessed’ (Krishna, 1992, p. 210). In computer
database management systems, views are built by
querying the underlying data and building new rela-
tions containing one or more answers from the
results. In print editorial practice, the critical text
is built by the editor according to more or less
explicit selection criteria and processing instructions
that are designed to produce a single value for each
query. Hence, a typical student edition of a medieval
or classical text might be understood as a selection
of readings that match paradigmatic forms in the
standard grammars and reflect statistically
common syntactic patterns. A modern spelling edi-
tion of Shakespeare is a view built on some under-
lying principle that has been processed to replace
Renaissance spellings with their modern equivalents.
An edition like the Kane-Donaldson Piers Plowman
is built on a far more complex set of selection cri-
teria and processing based on the editors’ research
into Middle English scribal practice. Editorial emen-
dations are, in this sense, simply an additional
column in the unstated, underlying table: editors
build them as alternatives to readings from surviv-
ing witnesses and select them whenever no other
reading in the underlying database meets the selec-
tion requirements.10
5 Improving on print practice
If this understanding of the critical text and its rela-
tionship to the data model underlying print critical
practice is correct, then one obvious place where
digital editors perhaps could improve on print con-
ventions might seem to lie in formalizing and
D. P. O’Donnell
120 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
automating the process by which print editors pro-
cess and query the data upon which their editions
are based. Such an approach, indeed, would have
two main advantages: it would allow us to test
others’ editorial approaches by modelling them pro-
grammatically; and it would allows us to take
advantage of the inherent flexibility of the digital
medium by providing users with access to limitless
critical texts of the same work. Where, for economic
and technological reasons, print editions tend to
offer readers only a single critical approach and
text, digital editions could now offer readings a
series of possible approaches and texts built accord-
ing to various selection criteria. In this approach,
users would read texts either by building their
own textual queries, or by selecting pre-made
queries that build views by dynamically modelling
the decisions of others—a Kane-Donaldson view of
Pier Plowman, perhaps, or a Gabler reading text
view of Ulysses.
In actual practice, we are a long way from being
able to build anything but the simplest of texts in
this manner. Certain processes can, of course, be
automated and even improved upon electroni-
cally—we can collate readings from different wit-
nesses, derive manuscript stemma, automatically
normalize punctuation and spelling, even model
scribal performance (Ciula, 2005; O’Donnell,
2005c). And it is easy to see how it we might
be able to build databases and queries so that we
can model human editorial decisions in relatively
simple cases—reproducing the flawed dialectal
texts of Cædmon’s Hymn discussed above,
perhaps, or building simple student editions of
small poems.
But such conceptually simple tasks are at the
extreme outer limits of what it is currently possible,
let alone economically reasonable, to do. Going
beyond this—learning to automate higher level crit-
ical decisions involving cultural, historical, or lit-
erary distinctions—is beyond the realm of current
database design and artificial intelligence even for
people working in fields vastly better funded than
textual scholarship. Thus, while it would be a
fairly trivial process to generate a reading text
based on a single witness from an underlying rela-
tional database, building automatically a best text
edition—that is to say, an edition in which a
single witness is singled out automatically for repro-
duction on the basis of some higher level criteria—is
beyond our current capabilities. Other distinctions
of the type made every day by human editors—
distinguishing between good and bad scribes, asses-
sing difficilior versus facilior readings, or weighing
competing evidence of authorial authorization—
belong to the realm of science fiction.11
This suggests on the one hand that we are far
away from being able to truly automate our digital
textual editions, and on the other that we need to
find some way of incorporating expert knowledge
into the editions that we currently can build that is
commensurate with their complexity. The more evi-
dence we cram into our digital editions, the harder
it becomes for uninitiated readers to make anything
of them. No two witnesses to any text are equally
reliable, authentic, or useful for all purposes at all
times. In the absence of a system that can build
custom editions in response to naı¨ve queries—
‘build me a general interest text of Don Juan’, ‘elim-
inate unreliable scribes’, or even ‘build me a student
edition’—editors will need to provide readers with
explicit expert guidance as to how the at times con-
flicting data in their editions is to be assessed. In
some cases, it is possible to use hierarchical and
object-oriented data models to encode these
human judgements so that they can be generated
dynamically (see note 11 above). In other cases,
digital editors, like their print predecessors, will
simply have to build critical texts of their editions
the old fashioned way—by hand—or run the risk or
failing to pass on the expert knowledge they have
built up over years of scholarly engagement with the
primary sources.
It is here, moreover, that digital editors can
improve theoretically and practically the most on
traditional print practice. For if critical reading
texts are, conceptually understood, the equivalent
of query-derived database views, then there is no
reason why readers of critical editions should not
be able to entertain multiple views of the underlying
data. Critical texts, in other words—as post-
structuralist theory has told us all along—really are
neither right nor wrong: they are simply views of a
textual history constructed according to different,
Back to the future
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 121
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
more or less explicit, selection criteria. In the print
world, economic necessity and technological rigidity
imposed constraints on the number of different
views editors could reasonably present to their
readers—and often encouraged them to see the
production of a single definitive critical text as the
primary purpose of their editions. Digital editors,
on the other hand, have the advantage of a
medium that allows the inclusion much more
easily of multiple critical views, a technology in
which the relationship between views and data is
widely known and accepted, and a theoretical cli-
mate that encourages an attention to variance. If we
are still far from being at the stage in which we can
produce critical views of our data using dynamic
searches, we are able even now to hard-code such
views into our editions in unobtrusive and user-
friendly ways.12
6 Conclusion
And so in the end, the future of digital editing may
lie more in our past than we commonly like to
consider. While digital editorial theory has tended
to define its project largely in reaction to previous
print practice, this approach both underestimates
the strength of the foundation we have been given
to build upon, and the true significance of our new
medium. For the exciting thing about digital editing
is not that it can do everything differently, but
rather that it can do some very important things
better. Over the course of the last half millennium,
print editorial practice has evolved an extremely
efficient intellectual model for the organization of
information about texts and witnesses. As digital
editors, we can greatly improve upon this model
both by recognizing and formalizing its intellectual
strength, and by implementing it far more fully and
flexibly than print editors themselves could ever
imagine. The question we need to answer, then, is
not whether we can do things differently, but how
doing things differently can improve on current
practice. But we will not be able to answer this
question until we recognize what current practice
already does very well.
References
Bart, P. R. (2006). Controlled experimental markup in a
TEI-conformant setting. Digital Medievalist 2.1. http://
www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/2.1/bart/.
British Library. Turning the Pages. http://www.bl.uk/
onlinegallery/ttp/ttpbooks.html.
Cavill, P. (2000). The manuscripts of Cædmon’s Hymn.
Anglia, 118: 499–530.
Cerquiglini, B. (1989). E´loge de la variante: Histoire cri-
tique de la philologie. Paris, E´ditions de Seuil.
Ciula, A. (2005). Digital palaeography: using the digital
representation of medieval script to support palaeo-
graphic analysis. Digital Medievalist 1.1 http://www.
digitalmedievalist.org/article.cfm?RecID¼2.
Dobbie, E. V. K. (1937). The Manuscripts of Cædmon’s
Hymn and Bede’s Death Song with a Critical Text of the
Epistola Cuthberti de obitu Bedæ. Columbia University
Studies in English and Comparative Literature, 128.
New York, Columbia University Press.
Dobbie, E. V. K. (ed.) (1942). The Anglo-Saxon Minor
Poems. The Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records, a Collective
Edition, 6. New York: Columbia University Press.
Dobiache-Rojdestvensky, O. (1928). Un manuscrit de
Be`de a` Le´ningrad. Speculum, 3: 314–21.
Elliot, L. (2000). How the Oxford English Dictionary
went online. Ariadne 24. http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/
issue24/oed-tech.
Finneran, R. J. (ed.) (1996). The Literary Text in the
Digital Age. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Foys, M. K. (ed.) (2003). The Bayeux Tapestry: Digital
Edition. Leicester: SDE.
Greetham, D. C. (1994). Textual Scholarship. New York,
Garland.
Jabbour, A. A. (1968). The Memorial Transmission
of Old English Poetry: A Study of the Extant
Parallel Texts. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Duke
University.
Karlsson, L. and Malm, L. (2004). Revolution or reme-
diation? A study of electronic scholarly editions on the
web. HumanIT, 7: 1–46.
Kiernan, K. S. (1990). Reading Cædmon’s Hymn with
someone else’s glosses. Representations, 32: 157–74.
Kiernan, K. S. (ed.) (1999/2003). The Electronic Beowulf,
2nd edn. London: British Library.
Krishna, S. (1992). Introduction to Database and
Knowledge-base Systems. Singapore, World Scientific.
D. P. O’Donnell
122 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Landow, G. P. and Delaney, P. (eds) (1993). The Digital
Word: Text-based Computing in the Humanities.
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Manly, J. M. and Rickert, E. (1940). The Text of the
Canterbury Tales. Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
McGann, J. J. (1983/1992). A Critique of Modern Textual
Criticism. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press.
McGann, J. J. (1995). Rationale of the Hypertext. http://
www/iath.virginia.edu/public/jjm2f/rationale.htm
McGillivray, M. (ed.) (1997). Geoffrey Chaucer’s Book of
the Duchess: A Hypertext Edition. Calgary, University of
Calgary Press.
McKenzie, D. F. (1984/1999). Bibliography and the
Sociology of Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Nicols, S. G. Jr (ed.) (1990). Speculum 65.
O’Donnell, D. P. (1996a). Manuscript Variation in
Multiple-Recension Old English Poetic Texts: The
Technical Problem and Poetical Art. Unpublished PhD
dissertation, Yale University.
O’Donnell, D. P. (1996b). A Northumbrian version of
‘Cædmon’s Hymn’ (eordu recension) in Brussels,
Bibliothe`que Royale MS 8245-57 ff. 62r2-v1:
Identification, edition, and filiation. In Houwen, L. A.
J. R. and MacDonald, A. A. (eds), Beda Venerabilis:
Historian, Monk and Northumbrian. Mediaevalia
Groningana, 19. Groningen: Egbert Forsten, pp.139–65.
O’Donnell, D. P. (2005a). Cædmon’s Hymn: A
Multimedia Study, Edition, and Archive. SEENET A.8.
Cambridge, D.S. Brewer.
O’Donnell, D. P. (2005b). O Captain! My Captain! Using
Technology to Guide Readers Through an Electronic
Edition. Heroic Age 8. http://www.heroicage.org/
issues/8/em.html
O’Donnell, D. P. (2005c). The ghost in the machine:
revisiting an old model for the dynamic generation of
digital editions. HumanIT, 8 (2005): 51–71.
Ore, E. S. (2004). Monkey business—or what is an edi-
tion? Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19: 35–44.
Pearsall, D. (1985). Editing medieval texts. In
McGann, J. J. (ed.), Textual Criticism and Literary
Interpretation. Chicago, U Chicago, pp. 92–106.
Reed Kline, N. (ed.) (2001). A Wheel of Memory: The
Hereford Mappamundi. Ann Arbor, University of
Michigan Press.
Robinson, F. C. and Stanley, E. G. (eds) (1991). Old
English Verse Texts from Many Sources: A
Comprehensive Collection. Early English Manuscripts
in Facsimile, 23. Copenhagen, Rosenkilde & Bagger.
Robinson, P. (nd). New Methods of Editing, Exploring,
and Reading the Canterbury Tales. http://www.cta.
dmu.ac.uk/projects/ctp/desc2.html.
Robinson, P. (ed.) (1996). The Wife of Bath’s Prologue on
CD-ROM. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Robinson, P. (2004). Where are We with Electronic
Scholarly Editions, and Where to We Want to be?
Jahrbuch fu¨r Computerphilologie Online at <http://
computerphilologie.uni-muenchen.de/ejournal.html>.
Also available in print: Jahrbuch fu¨r Computerphilologie.
pp. 123–143.
Robinson, P. (2005). Current issues in making digital
editions of medieval texts—or, do electronic scholarly
editions have a future? Digital Medievalist 1.1 http://
www.digitalmedievalist.org/article.cfm?RecID¼6.
Robinson, P. (2006). The Canterbury Tales and other
medieval texts. In Unsworth, J., Burnard, L. and
Katherine O’Brian O’Keefe (eds), Electronic Textual
Editing. New York: Modern Language Association of
America.
Shillingsburg, P. L. (1996). Electronic editions. Scholarly
Editing in the Computer Age: Theory and Practice, 3rd
edn.
Silberschatz, A., Korth, H., and Sudarshan, S. (2006).
Database System Concepts. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Sisam, K. (1953). Studies in the History of Old English
Literature. Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Smith, A. H. (ed.) (1938/1978). Three Northumbrian
Poems: Cædmon’s Hymn, Bede’s Death Song, and the
Leiden Riddle. With a bibliography compiled by M. J.
Swanton. Revised edn Exeter Medieval English Texts.
Exeter: University of Exeter Press.
Sutherland, K. (ed.) (1997). Electronic Text: Investigations
in Method and Theory. Oxford: Clarendon.
Wuest, P. (1906). Zwei neue Handschriften von
Cædmons Hymnus. ZfdA, 48: 205–26.
Notes
1 As this list suggests, my primary experience with actual
practice is with digital editions of medieval texts.
Recent theoretical and practical discussions, however,
suggest that little difference is to be found in electronic
texts covering other periods.
Back to the future
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 123
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
2 Synthetic here is not quite synonymous with eclectic as
used to describe the approach of the Gregg-Bower’s
school of textual criticism. Traditionally, an eclectic
text is a single, hypothetical, textual reconstruction
(usually of the presumed Authorial text) based on
assumption of divided authority. In this approach, a
copy text is used to supply accidental details of spelling
and punctuation and (usually) to serve as a default
source for substantive readings that affect the meaning
of the abstract artistic work. Readings from this copy
text are then corrected by emendation or, preferably,
from forms found in other historical witnesses. In this
essay, synthetic is used to refer to a critical text that
attempts to summarize in textual form an editorial
position about an abstract work’s development at
some point in its textual history. All eclectic texts are
therefore synthetic, but not all synthetic texts are eclec-
tic: a best text (single witness) edition is also synthetic
if, as the name implies, an editorial claim is being made
about the particular reliability, historical importance,
or interest of the text as represented in the chosen
witness—as opposed to a diplomatic transcription, in
which the focus is on reporting the details of a given
witness as accurately as possible.
3 It is indeed significant that the PPEA—the most ambi-
tious digital critical edition of a medieval text that I am
aware of—is at this stage in its development publishing
primarily as an archive: the development of critical texts
of the A-, B-, and C-text traditions has been deferred
until after the publication of individual edition/facsi-
miles of the known witnesses (Bart, 2006).
4 Transcriptions, editions, facsimiles, and studies men-
tioned in this paragraph in many cases have been super-
seded by subsequent work; readers interested in the
current state of Cædmon’s Hymn should begin with
the bibliography in O’Donnell (2005a).
5 While there is reason to doubt the details of Dobbie’s
recensional division, his fundamental conclusion, that
dialect did not play a crucial role in the poem’s textual
development remains undisputed. For recent (com-
peting) discussions of the Hymn’s transmission, see
O’Donnell (2005a) and Cavill (2000).
6 There are other types of databases, some of which are at
times more suited to representation of information
encoded in structural markup languages such as
XML, and to the type of manipulation common in
textual critical studies (see below, note 11). None of
these other models, however, expresses information as
parsimoniously as does the relational model
(Silberschatz et al. 2006, p. 362–5).
7 This is a rough rather than a formal definition.
Formally, a well-designed relational database normally
should be in either third normal form or Boyce–Codd
normal form (BCNF). A relation is said to be in third
normal form when (1) the domains of all attributes
are atomic, (2) all non-key attributes are fully depen-
dent on the key attributes (Krishna, 1992, p. 37). A
relation is said to be in BCNF if whenever a non-trivial
functional dependency ! A holds in R, X is a super-
key for R (Krishna, 1992, p. 38). Other normal forms
exist for special kinds of dependencies (Silbertschatz
et al., 2006, p. 293–98).
8 In actual practice, the model would be far more com-
plex and include multiple levels of repeating informa-
tion (words within lines, for example). This example
also assumes that the word is the basic unit of col-
lation; while this works well for most Old English
poetry, it may not for other types of literature.
9 Of course, critical editions typically contain far more
than bibliographic, textual, and lexical/grammatical
information. This too can be modelled relationally,
however, although it would be quixotic to attempt
to account for the infinite range of possible material
one might include in a critical edition in this essay.
Thus cultural information about a given text or wit-
nesses is functionally dependent on the specific text or
witness in question. Interestingly, the more complex
the argumentation becomes, the less complex the
underlying data model appears to be: a biographical
essay on a text’s author, for example, might take up
but a single cell in one of our hypothetical tables.
10 The critical apparatus in most print and many digital
editions is itself also usually a view of an implicit
textual database, rather than the database itself.
Although it usually is presented in quasi-tabular
form, it rarely contains a complete accounting for
every form in the text’s witness base.
11 This is not to say that it is impossible to use data
modelling to account for these distinctions—simply
that we are far from being able to derive them arbi-
trarily from 2D relational databases, however com-
plex. Other data models, such as hierarchical or
object-oriented databases can be used to build such
distinctions into the data itself, though this by defini-
tion involves the application of expert knowledge. In
O’Donnell (2005a), for example, the textual apparatus
as a hierarchical database. This allows readers to in
effect query the database, searching for relations pre-
defined as significant, substantive, or orthographic by
the editor. See O’Donnell (2005a, §§ ii.7, ii.19, 7.2–9).
12 In the case of my edition of Cædmon’s Hymn, this
takes the form of multiple critical texts and apparatus:
several reconstructions of the poem’s archetypal form,
and various critical views of the poem’s five main
D. P. O’Donnell
124 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
recensions and collations. The criteria used to con-
struct these views is indicated explicitly in the title
of each page and explained in detail in the editorial
introductions. The individual editions were extracted
from an SGML-encoded text using style sheets—in
essence hard-wired database queries reflecting higher
level editorial decisions—but presented to the reader
as a series of progressively abstract views. In keeping
with the developing standard for digital textual
editions, the edition also allows users direct access to
the underlying transcriptions and facsimiles upon
which it is based. The result is an edition that attempts
to combine the best of the digital and print worlds: the
archiving function common to most electronic edi-
tions (and traditionally the focus of Cædmon’s
Hymn textual research in print), with the emphasis
on the presentation of expert knowledge characteristic
of traditional print editorial practice.
Back to the future
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 125
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
