
This essay was written in 1997. It has not been sig-
nificantly updated but reflects that particular
moment in the debate on electronic text.
The invitation to make this presentation reached
me at the moment that I was reading ‘RootCellar’
by Theodore Roethke about a place, ‘dank as a
ditch’,2 where the remains of stored vegetables
served as the foundation for a rich complex of
new developments, not all of which seemed very
attractive; the olfactory sensations, the ‘congress of
stinks’, did, however, represent on-going life. It hap-
pened, also, that the last paper on electronic texts I
was asked to present had focused on the remarkable
expansion of available electronic texts on the inter-
net about which, after a two or three week survey, I
worked very rough estimates and guessed that about
one-tenth of 1% of the available texts on the inter-
net were reliable for scholarly work—99.9% of the
texts were who knows what. The word ‘cellar’, I
believe, means storehouse. And when it comes to
root cellars, the word ‘dank’ is not necessarily
pejorative. But there is something antiseptic in pop-
ular images of electronic texts, archived, as they
seem to be, in a luminous box or cellar above a
keyboard: they are dry, they resist handling except
through some remote medium, one does not press
the flesh of electronic texts, and therefore one does
not leave on them an ever accumulating deposit of
body oils and odours as one does on books in the
library. So, ‘dank’ in reference to electronic texts
brings an unfamiliar, organic, biological ambience
into this antiseptic world, suggesting that electronic
texts might breed, or grow, or develop molds or
viruses of various sorts.
I do not know if this notion of a dank cellar is at
all illuminating to anyone but myself; so perhaps I
should drop it and get on to the ideas that it gen-
erated for me.
One thought is that we are being overwhelmed
by texts of unknown provenance, with unknown
corruptions, representing unidentified versions.
These texts are the results of enthusiasms of various
sorts concerning computers and the internet in par-
ticular. It is now easy to scan or type a text (pre-
ferably one that is out of copyright) and post it on
the World Wide Web and become thereby a pub-
lisher. The reasons to do this may be egotistical, but
for many, I am sure, the reason is altruistic: to make
available for free the fruits of some labour and some
technology where the alternatives might be to pur-
chase a book or visit a library. The first great,
obvious advantage of having computerized texts is
that they are searchable, excerptable, and indexable
without the use of 3 by 5 cards (is there anyone left
who remembers 3 by 5 cards?); but these excellent
qualities of electronic texts have tended to generate
an enthusiasm that neglects concerns for textual
accuracy and provenance. The rank glut of such
texts on the internet produces a perfume of fecund-
ity with a distinct under-scent of decay and disease.
But I suggest we do not dwell on that phenomenon
of electronic texts. In any case, this view merely
replicates objections voiced in every generation
since the fifteenth century—objections to the
Correspondence:
Peter Shillingsburg,
Department of English,
Crown Center for the
Humanities, Loyola
University Chicago, 6525 N.
Sheridan Road, Chicago,
IL 60626, USA.
E-mail:
pshillingsburg@luc.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
19
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn031 Advance Access Published on 3 December 2008
unbridled proliferation of corrupt and corrupting
texts.
A companion to that thought is that our students
are therefore exposed to texts that are untethered
from their origins, from their original dates, original
publishers, original typefaces, and original page
arrangements and weights. These are the residual
marks of what I ask leave to call the ‘eventness’ of
texts, the clues to the cultural contexts that informed
the writing and reading of the works when they were
fresh. And even if such matters are known by our
students because they have access to other sources of
information, the texts of most electronic editions
have often been poorly prepared or improperly
vetted, or not vetted at all; so that inadvertent read-
ings lurk unmarked like verbal land mines to sabo-
tage the pursuit of learning. Students eager for free
texts and happy with the advantages of the computer
medium are not naturally inclined to ask the neces-
sary questions about provenance and accuracy.
The unsophisticated replication of texts on the inter-
net as well as the proliferation of relatively cheaply
printed paper texts reflects the widespread assump-
tion employed in, for example, the construction of
classroom anthologies: that a literary text consists of
words and punctuation that will mean the same
thing wherever and, however, it appears. But com-
munication theory and critical reflection suggest that
each bibliographical event, like each verbal utter-
ance, is significantly affected by its constituting con-
text and medium. As students of texts, we care
about provenance, contexts, histories, bibliography,
and the accuracy of texts because all these affect how
we read and how we understand the text. We
must not neglect to teach our students these things
anew every year. Of course this criticism of student
texts, like the first criticism, above, is very familiar;
for we have voiced them of cheap reprints for years.
A third thought is that contemplating the grow-
ing disaster of electronic pulp texts (if you will
pardon the mixed metaphor)—contemplating
these matters might generate a hysterical attempt
on our part to police the internet or to set up a
national or international text-vetting bureau or to
publish in some official organ a list of approved
electronic editions. After all, there is precedence
for doing such things in the Modern Language
Association’s Center for Editions of American
Authors and Committee on Scholarly Editions,
about which I could say a few things. But such
organizations in the past have not stemmed the
tide of unreliable reprints. Nor will they, in my
opinion, make a dent in the flow of bad or unsafe
or merely undocumented electronic texts.
Instead of that desperate remedy, I suggest that
the activity of scholarly editing in electronic media
be conducted with firm attention to its own house,
to its own root cellar. There is, after all, not much
difference between the electronic world and the
print world concerning the relative availability of
corrupt or at least unvetted texts and reliable ones.
Unreliable, unvetted reprints outnumber scholarly
editions in the print world by proportions similar
to the ones I am guessing at for electronic texts.
I turn, then, from the at-large world of electronic
texts to the smaller one of electronic scholarly edi-
tions, where a good deal of thought and a develop-
ing body of practice presents both a more hopeful
and yet problematic picture. I do not mean to be the
historian of this movement, but I can use a thumb-
nail sketch of it as a background for my concerns
today. Electronic texts date back twenty-five years
and more, but the electronic book as an end in
itself—that is, not as a temporary form to use, for
example, in creating a concordance or for typeset-
ting a book—is a phenomenon of the very late
1980s and 1990s. Its short history is remarkably
varied. Its early manifestations now make us smile:
ftp sites from which one could download an ASCII
text file without italics or other formatting seemed
adequate to many people who thought their per-
sonal libraries would be greatly increased at little
or no cost. Then virtual worlds arrived and
‘Saturday Night Live’ satirized the virtual book
with images of a book shown on a screen where
keyboard commands turned codex pages, scarcely
as good as a movie of a book with someone turning
pages. The first of these electronic schemes reduced
the rich complexity of the codex into a flat stream of
ASCII characters; the second demonstrated a pau-
city of imagination trapped in the world of physical
objects and photography.
In 1993 with the help of a number of people in
modern literature, I drew up a description of what I
P. Shillingsburg
20 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
then thought would be an ideal electronic book,
one that took advantage of developing software to
provide textual experiences not available in codex
forms and stepping gingerly beyond developing
software to imagine other possibilities not yet avail-
able in prototype form. It was my first excursion
into fantasy fiction. That description was widely
circulated on the internet, presented at an MLA
convention, and subsequently expanded and pub-
lished in The Literary Text in the Digital Age.3 I
am happy to say that some of what we imagined
then has since become possible and other desirable
attributes of electronic texts that I did not imagine
then have been developed. But other parts have not
yet been developed.
The most ambitious development spawned by
the demands of sophisticated electronic editions
has been, I think the SGML/TEI markup system,
which has attempted to provide a language and logi-
cal structures with which to build electronic texts
that accommodate the rich complexity of language
and the physical structures of books. Among the
important practical projects implementing that
markup language and doing in the short term what
can be done to make the fruits of scholarly editing
available in electronic form is the Model Editions
Partnership conducted by David Chesnutt, Susan
Hockey, and Michael Sperberg-McQueen. Other
very important projects are the Rossetti archive
being developed by Jerome McGann, the Chaucer
project by Peter Robinson, the Emily Dickinson
project by Martha Nell Smith, Ellen Louise Hart,
and Marta Werner, two Ezra Pound projects by
Patti Cockran and by Richard Taylor, the Women
Writers Project at Brown University directed by Julia
Flanders, the William Blake project by Joseph
Viscomi and Morris Eaves, and the Piers Plowman
archives by Hoyt Duggan.4 There are others, but I
mention these to call attention to serious, imagina-
tive projects that make available research tools of
genuine value, not only for the foundational schol-
arly work on the authors and texts involved but
because they are pushing the envelope of electronic
possibilities, asking more and more of the medium
in an attempt to conceive and define what is meant
or can be meant by the electronic edition, as opposed
to a print edition.
But it was both thrilling and sobering to me
recently to hear Jerome McGann and Peter
Robinson focus their attention, not on the glitzy
achievements of their projects, though both could
have done so, and not on difficulties and long hours
that have dogged their work, though they could
have.5 But what they noticed was the way in
which their projects had forced them to think
about texts in new ways, to ask new questions
about textuality, and perhaps most interestingly, to
ask new questions about what the archive was to do.
I found this aspect of their work especially
interesting for two reasons. The first was nostalgic.
In 1977–78 when I spent a year with a program-
mer developing the nine programmes known as
CASE (Computer Assisted Scholarly Editing)—
programmes developed to aid the textual research
of transcription, collation, and textual apparatuses
and to prepare input for typesetting machines—the
main thing I discovered was that my rationales for
scholarly editing were not carefully thought out. I
discovered that, whereas in science if one is careless
one’s lab explodes, in the humanities if one makes a
mistake it generally goes unnoticed until one has to
develop computer programmes that will replicate or
organize the work. Then one discovers the meaning
of the word ‘discipline’.
I heard in McGann’s presentation that the diffi-
culties of accommodating the Rossetti material to
the SGML markup language was stretching his
understanding of both the structural complexity of
the works he was handling (that is, he was learning
to look at the paintings in new ways) and the struc-
tural gaps in SGML. (That is a point, incidentally,
that is debated by the developers and other users of
SGML/TEI.) One great value of modern work on
electronic archives lies in its process, in what the
work teaches the worker, rather than in the accom-
plishment of the product. I will come back to that
thought later.
In Peter Robinson’s presentation, as he focused
on what did not please him about his very impress-
ive Wife of Bath prototype for the electronic
Chaucer, and as he outlined what he will do differ-
ently at the next stage, there was a similar emphasis
on how doing the work and struggling with the
inadequacies of the software led to new
Dank cellar of electronic texts
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 21
understandings of the significance of Chaucer’s work
and of the responsibilities of the editor. Let me make
that idea less abstract. What I understood Robinson
to say was that the neutral, objective, CD presenta-
tion and description of eighty-eight Chaucer manu-
scripts with approximately ten million hyperlinks
(most of which were generated automatically by
his software) ran the high risk of burying the user.
His proposed solution is to provide the reader with
explanations of the significance of the parts, to pro-
vide frankly interpretive signposts, to express editor-
ial opinions about the value and significance of the
materials presented.
That is an important development for the debate
on editorial theory and practice. It brings me to the
second reason I was pleased to hear of developments
in McGann’s and Robinson’s projects. It used to be,
thirty years ago, that an editor imposed his or her
understanding of the textual situation onto the edi-
tion, edited it boldly, and expected appreciation
from readers for having provided, as a finished
product, an edition on which readers could rely
without having to investigate. The justifications
for such editorial actions stressed the objectivity of
the work and the honesty of the apparatus. But self-
deception in scholarship never lasts for long, and
idealist, intentionalist editing was recognized for
the subjective, dominating, reductive activity that
it was. In its place more recently arose the appar-
ently ‘truly’ objective pursuit of the electronic
archive with objective, high-resolution digitized
reproductions of original texts, objective and anti-
septic parallel texts, and hyperlinks to related mate-
rials. And now Peter Robinson—who to do him
justice never said that what he was doing was objec-
tive, but who tried to minimize the presence of the
editor in the Wife of Bath CD-ROM edition—now
he says that such a neutral approach in a complex
edition might bury the reader who needs the editor
to exert a guiding hand. Amen. We have once again
discovered that scholarly editing is not best served
by editors whose main goal is to efface their pres-
ence from the project but rather by those who con-
fidently and boldly assert their presence, demanding
that readers recognize the scholarly edition as a
contribution to criticism. Editing is by nature
and by definition interference; it cannot be done
objectively. It should be undertaken boldly, and
should be reported straightforwardly. There is
room for alternative editions.
In the last few years scholarly editors at confer-
ences on electronic editions have been focusing their
attention, naturally enough, on the ways to produce
electronic editions more than on the implications of
those ways to the study of texts or to the pursuit of
academic interests that such a shift in medium
entails. I believe this conference to be a good cor-
rective to the general trend. It is only natural that
the practical considerations of electronic text-
production should absorb the attention of electronic
text producers, for there is so much to deal with:
choices of hardware (where every new year’s model
is capable of so much more than the model you
bought) and choices of software (where the cleverest
and niftiest capabilities entail, as likely as not, pro-
prietary coding that locks the edition into one form
of access). To these one can add the many problems
entailed in developing or learning a text-encoding
system that will overcome the problems of ever
developing and evolving hardware and software.
And it has been necessary for scholarly editors also
to devote a great deal of attention to design: what
shall the screen page look like? How shall hypertext
links look and work? How should windows pop up
and disappear or fade into the background? How
shall we incorporate sound and motion in our
texts? Where are the boundaries between scholarly
editing, archiving, and pedagogy?
These important concerns are likely to continue
to absorb a great deal of attention, and we must not
be distracted from them by temptations to scream
out against the rapid proliferation of unreliable
texts prepared (I speak loosely, of course), prepared
by people who have not bothered to think as long
or as hard as scholarly editors do about textual
matters.
But I have already said all that I know about
hardware and software and book design for electro-
nic texts in Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age
and in my chapter of Richard Finneran’s The
Literary Text in the Digital Age. And I will be con-
tented in reminding myself of a fundamental fact
about scholarly editing that I fear has become a
hobby-horse for me.
P. Shillingsburg
22 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
It is that no editorial task, whether in print or
electronic medium is merely the reproduction of a
text. Stated positively, all editorial tasks entail
more than the mere transfer of words and punctua-
tion or images from one form to another. Every
such transfer creates something new and so radically
different from its original that scholarly editors for
centuries have felt the need to introduce their edi-
tions to explain what has happened. I leave aside
here introductions that claim the new form is
better or more accurate or more real or more
useful; I call attention only to the need for an intro-
duction that explains the differences between origi-
nal and newly edited texts.
We need to remember or reinvent the reasoning
which generates the need to introduce new editions.
It has to do with our understanding of how texts
operate—or to be more accurate, of how humans
operate with texts. Texts are, after all, merely
arrangements of symbols presented in certain for-
mats. Humans undergo considerable training in
interpreting the symbols, and frequent use teaches
them much about the implications of the formats in
which they encounter the symbols. Meanings are
generated by readers who have learned to deal
with symbols and formats. Change the symbol and
the meaning changes; change the format and the
implications are changed; change the contexts of
interactions with texts and the importance and sig-
nificance of the text changes.
Two summers ago I had these truths confront me
in a physical way. I visited the extensive Victorian
fiction collections known as the Metzdorf, the
Parrish, and Taylor collections at the Firestone
Library in Princeton and, two weeks later the even
more extensive Wolff collection at the Harry
Ransom Humanities Center at the University of
Texas. I was working on a paper concerning the
appearance, the formats, of Victorian fiction and
was fortunate to be introduced to the stacks of the
Parrish and Wolff collections and to have multiple
copies of single titles brought to my work table. The
sensations, the look, the feel, the odours, the tex-
tures, the colours, shapes, and sizes of the books all
have a bearing on what follows, though the most
overwhelming sensation I felt as I looked at 7000
Victorian novels in Texas was that of ignorance.
I know next to nothing about Victorian fiction,
for that large room of books is merely representative
of the 40,000 or 50,000 novels published between
1830 and 1900. And that vast array of books stood
in stark isolation from the books that they jostled in
the days when they were fresh off the press. Where
were the books of agriculture, history, geography,
exploration, navigation, mining, economics, art,
music, biography, science, religion, cookery, and
domestic economy? How could I come to know
the meaning or importance or significance of any
one of these books without knowing what other
books were published by its publishers or what
other books were reviewed together with it? Must
I go to Austin, Texas, and get permission between
the hours of ten and four to see no more than five
books at a time to get a sense of what Victorian
fiction was? I tasted and smelled and felt enough
of original books in the context of their peers to
know that it makes a huge difference in our experi-
ence of texts—a difference that does not and will
not manifest itself in paperback reprints, in schol-
arly print editions, or in electronic books as cur-
rently conceived.
Nor can the interests I developed in the subject
be easily satisfied by existing bibliographies or
descriptions of collections, though the Wolff bib-
liography, Michael Sadleir’s Nineteenth Century
Fiction, and descriptions of the Rauri MacLean col-
lection in Toronto are illuminating, impressive, and
mind bending once one has developed a hunger to
know. Nor can existing histories of writing, publish-
ing, and reading, or even a few visits to major col-
lections of Victorian fiction provide more than
appetizers, experienced at too long intervals.
Additional descriptions of the ‘faces of Victorian
fiction’6 of the whimsical sort I wrote will not do
much to provide students or colleagues with the
materials needed to develop a sensitivity to what
Victorian fiction looked like or what its appearances
meant to contemporary readers.
Further reflection on my visits to the Metzdorf,
Parrish, Taylor, and Wolff collections and perusal of
descriptions of Sadleir’s books and of MacLean’s
collection led me to the conclusion that these rich
resources have two very serious flaws: the first is
that they are by necessity sequestered from most
Dank cellar of electronic texts
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 23
students and especially from me, an interested party
who lives near to none of the honey; the second is
that each collection is, by virtue of its selection prin-
ciples, a distortion of the history of Victorian fic-
tion. What bookstore in Victorian England shelved
only first editions of novels? How can such collec-
tions represent the ‘eventness’ of Victorian fiction?
Robert Lee Wolff’s collection of Mary Elizabeth
Braddon’s works, for example, included many
reprints of her best-selling Lady Audley’s Secret
and it managed to fail to include a first printing
of the first edition. But this is an unusual condition
for special collections. For most of his authors,
Wolff’s collection holds only the first edition. His
collection fails to include all the reprints, even of
Lady Audley’s Secret and therefore his bibliography
of Victorian Fiction, which is really a catalogue of
the books he owned, leaves out much of the printing
history of Braddon’s book. This is not a criticism of
Wolff’s magnificent work. It is a description of the
state of affairs that developed at a time when collec-
tors’ interests were driven by concerns different to
those that drive my conception of this project.
Gordon S. Haight’s description of the editions of
George Eliot’s The Mill on the Floss, for a different
kind of example, provides a comprehensive record
of ‘authorized’ productions of that work from 1860
to 1888[?]. It provides a better visualization and
understanding of the production objects and texts
of The Mill than can be found in any one library in
the world. But even such a listing and description
and analysis are bounded by the compiler’s
interest—in this case, in the ‘composition and revi-
sion life’ of the work. Haight’s account does not
include the evidence of the very active continued
‘reading life’ of the work represented by the multiple
unauthorized editions in America and Germany nor
the multiple unauthorized editions everywhere that
proliferated after the author’s death.
Of course for most Victorian fiction there was
only one edition ever. But there is no bibliography
of Victorian fiction that is comprehensive as a
record of Victorian consumption of native fiction.
Obviously, the boundaries of this project are artifi-
cial and could be extended.
My long-standing commitment to editing the
works of W. M. Thackeray and my newly discovered
interest in the ‘Faces of Victorian Fiction’ led me to
imagine a resource that is the kernel of an impos-
sible dream proposal. It is to pursue systematically
the establishment of an electronic archive of
Victorian Fiction, beginning with images of original
editions in contemporary bindings, and then
including digitized texts, and then expanding to
include textual, production, and other historical
annotations, and texts newly edited by bold editors.
I imagined an opening page, not unlike a storage
root cellar or library door into which the user
entered a virtual bibliography: a shelving area that
appears to hold lifelike books arranged—arranged at
the touch of a button chronologically (so I could see
all the novels published in 1859), or alphabetically
by author, or grouped according to publisher, each
publisher’s output arranged in the order published
or by author, or perhaps grouped according to orig-
inal publisher’s price, or by format (all two volume
books sold at twelve shillings a volume separated
from all the three volume novels sold for 36 shil-
lings, for example). In my dream I saw a merging of
Parrish, Taylor, Wolff, Metzdorf, Sadleir, and
MacLean, with additions from the Bodleian, and
the British Library. And from my keyboard I
could pull any book from the shelf and read, and
search, and see parallel texts, and read historical and
textual annotations, and have textual cruxes in ver-
bose or background mode, and hyperlink to—to
you name it.
And yet that is not enough to satisfy my craving.
Special collections in libraries distort our sense of
the marketing and textual history of Victorian
Fiction. Every book ever published had a first edi-
tion, but the most widely read books were produced
in multiple editions. Special collections tend to
emphasize two qualities that belie the historical
record: first editions and fine condition. The result
is that the evidence of reading is not preserved.
Books that are much reprinted are seldom preserved
in those reprinted forms. Copies that are much read,
are seldom preserved because of the used condition.
So, my dank cellar of electronic Victorian fiction
must include cheap reprints and shaken and
mauled editions as well. And before waking from
this nightmarish vision of delight I should note
that this proposal does not pretend to incorporate
P. Shillingsburg
24 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
the contexts of Victorian fiction or literature on a
broad scale as does George Landow’s Victorian
Web. I imagine there being a variety of links
between the Victorian Web and the ‘Victorian
Fiction’ archive as well as other relevant web sites.
But I come back from that vision of an end prod-
uct to a point I promised to return to: to the
research involved in constructing such a library, to
the bibliographical investigation, to the careful
observation of the text in its various physical
forms each representing textual acts at points in
time. There is no bibliography we can merely scan
into a data base; there is no collection of texts we
merely need to photograph. What this grandiose
scheme requires is what every electronic scholarly
edition requires in a smaller way: basic textual
scholarship, bibliography, textual criticism, critical
acumen in the writing of introductions and expla-
natory notes, sensitivity to voices in the text, and the
courage to express the best thinking the scholar has
about the significance of the evidence at hand.
To conclude, root cellars are very necessary units
and they house the sustenance of life. But they need
constant attention, annual cleaning, restocking, and
shelf repair. Scholarly editing is not ever finished;
and it is done well or ill and redone well or ill, and it
is constantly being confused by lay persons, stu-
dents, and even members of our profession with
reprintings of every sort. Our task, I think, is to
keep our cellar restocked, properly labelled, properly
preserved, and as free of mold, viruses, and tainted
fruit as careful scholarship can provide. I do not
mean we should keep out the cheap reprints; I
mean only that no text should pretend to be other
than what it is. If it is a cheap, shoddily prepared
text, let it present itself as such—at least in our root
cellar—and not pretend to represent ‘the work
itself’. We cannot rid the world of mold and
debris, but we can refrain from creating it, and we
can keep it out of our cellar by circulating our
stock, by providing accurate descriptions of text
and provenance, by adding to old scholarly editions
new ones, boldly and straightforwardly edited, not
intended to last for ever but intended to feed the
minds of the next generation for a few years until
they see how best to feed themselves and their
progeny.
Notes
1 This text is published in a slightly revised version as
Chapter 6 of From Gutenberg to Google: Electronic
Representations of Literary Texts (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2006), pp. 138–50.
2 Roethke, T. (1966). Collected Poems of Theodore
Roethke. New York: Doubleday, p. 38.
3 Richard, J. F. (ed.). (1996). Principles for electronic
archives, scholarly editions, and tutorials in The
Literary Text in the Digital Age. Ann Arbor: U
Michigan P, pp. 23–35.
4 Model Editions Partnership, http://adh.sc.edu/, (last
accessed 6 November 2008); Rossetti Archive, http://
www.rossettiarchive.org/, (last accessed 6 November
2008); Chaucer, http://www.canterburytalesproject.
org/index.html, last visited 6 November; Dickinson,
http://www.emilydickinson.org/index.html, (last
accessed 6 November 2008); Women Writers Project,
http://www.wwp.brown.edu/, (last accessed 6
November 2008); Blake Archive, http://www.blakear
chive.org/blake/main.html, (last accessed 6 November
2008); Piers Plowman, http://www.iath.virginia.edu/
seenet/piers/, (last accessed 6 November 2008)
5 McGann’s and Robinson’s remarks were made in the
‘Voice, Text and Hypertext at the Millennium
Conference at the University of Washington’, 29
October 1997 to 1 November 1997.
6 Bornstein G. and Tinkle T. (1998). The Faces of
Victorian Fiction. The Iconic Page. Ann Arbor: U
Michigan P, pp. 141–56.
Dank cellar of electronic texts
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 25
