
This essay was written in 1997. It has not been sig-
nificantly updated but reflects that particular
moment in the debate on electronic text.
In recent decades, the electronic preparation of
editions has revolutionized the practice of scholarly
editing. Now, electronic publication promises a
second revolution for editors who have scarcely
caught their breath from the first one. This paper
outlines what seem to the author to be the most
crucial differences between editing for print publi-
cation and editing for electronic publication and
sketches some demands of the new medium and
the best way to meet those demands. Let us begin
by considering two pages from important books.
The page in Fig. 1 is carefully designed to give the
reader a very specific aesthetic experience. The type
was carefully chosen to fit the work; it is laid out on
the page so as to suggest the more splendid of the
medieval manuscripts in which the work it presents
has been preserved. Expansive margins contrast
with a dense text block, whose regularity is relieved
by intricately decorated initials (Fig. 2). The paper
is heavy and well made, although by its nature
the image cannot show this. It is a page made,
and exquisitely well made, for looking at.
Now consider, by way of contrast, the pages
in Fig. 3.
There is nothing remarkable about this opening;
the layout is thoroughly conventional, virtually
identical to that found in any of hundreds of edi-
tions of the 19th and other centuries. It does not
mimic the manuscripts that preserved the poems
presented. The typeface used (Fig. 4), though not
particularly ugly, is also not particularly beautiful.
It was not chosen especially for this edition; many
other books published by the same press use the
same face. These pages were not made to capture
the aesthetic gaze, but as the ample margins and the
careful provision of line numbering and poem refer-
encing system show, to be read, re-read, and
annotated.
Several differences between these examples are
worth pointing out. First, as noted, they differ
from each other in numerous details of presenta-
tion: font design, type size, page layout, density of
the text block, physical size of the page, quality of
paper. Second, largely as a result of these differences
Correspondence:
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen,
259 State Road 399,
Espan˜ola, NM 87532-3170,
USA.
E-mail:
cmsmcq@acm.org
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
27
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn034 Advance Access Published on 8 January 2009
of presentation, the two pages have very different
effects. The Chaucer edition in Fig. 1 offers the
reader an intense aesthetic experience. The archaic
text is presented in a luxurious and archaizing type-
face and page layout. Although the page appeals in
part to the viewer’s fantasies of life in Chaucer’s
England, the experience is offered in some sense
ahistorical. No hint of textual problems invades
the page; no apparatus of variants reminds the
beholder of textual variation and the vagaries of
manuscript traditions; no reference numbers sug-
gest the need for commentary or annotation.
The edition of Walther von der Vogelweide in
Fig. 3, by contrast, offers itself not primarily as a
means to an aesthetic experience but as a functional
tool for students and teachers. The apparatus criti-
cus serves as a constant reminder that the text is
a historical artifact, the variants as an invitation to
consider alternatives to the reading text and to
check the editor’s work in establishing that text.
Any aesthetic encounter with the literary work is
the responsibility of the reader; the book design
offers little help in the endeavor.
Third, while each is historically important, they
are important for very different reasons. The
Kelmscott Chaucer, from which the page in Fig. 1
comes, was printed by William Morris at the
Kelmscott Press in 1896.1 It is a milestone in the
history of bookmaking in modern Europe. It does
not, however, mark any particular achievement in
the history of Chaucerian textual criticism. Morris
is said, to be sure, to have taken particular care
with the text, but by this is meant apparently only
that he made inquiries about the available editions
and manuscripts and then copied the text out with-
out alteration and without apparatus from Skeat’s
edition.
The book from which the page in Fig. 3 comes
is, by contrast, no monument in the history of
Western bookmaking. While not particularly bad,
it is also not particularly good. It is mediocre, in
both the neutral and pejorative senses. But it is
Karl Lachmann’s edition of Walther von der
Vogelweide.2 It would be hard to find another
editor whose work on both Middle High German
and Latin authors had similar importance in the
history of Western text criticism. It has taken Ger-
manic philology more than a century to re-edit all
of the Middle High German works edited by Lach-
mann; more than one editor has spent a career
working on a single text which Lachmann edited
over the course of a summer or two, only to die
with the apparatus of variants still incomplete and
still unpublished. Lachmann’s Walther (like some
others of his Middle High German editions) is still
in print for use in lectures and seminars.3
In the context of a collection of essays devoted to
the question of electronic editions, however, the
most striking characteristics of these two very dif-
ferent editions may be their similarities.
Most obviously, neither edition can conveniently
change: each is static, immutable. Each chooses one
particular view, out of many different possible
views, of the text it presents, and one particular
way to present that view to readers. Neither edition
can change its style of presentation, nor can the
information provided be changed conveniently.4
Each editor must choose what information about
the text to present and how to present it, and each
edition is the record of the editor’s choices.
Fig. 1 A page of the Kelmscott Chaucer
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
28 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
As has frequently been observed, electronic pub-
lication puts the edition, and thus the editor, into a
radically different position. The medium is dynamic
and mutable, rather than static or stable. In the
terminology of computer programming and
system design, the print medium forces an early
binding of the answers to all questions about what
information is to be presented to the reader and
how it is to be presented, while electronic delivery
of editions, by contrast, allows for much later bind-
ing. While in print the choices of font, type size,
margins, and layout are made and fixed long
before the reader takes the book to hand, with elec-
tronic delivery it is possible, given suitable planning
and software, to delay the choice of font, text size,
shape of the text block (window), etc., until the very
Fig. 2 Closeup of the beginning of the Wife of Bath’s
Prologue
Fig. 3 Two pages from Karl Lachmann’s edition of Walther von der Vogelweide
Fig. 4 Closeup of the beginning of the Reichston
How to teach your edition how to swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 29
moment of reading, and allow the edition’s reader,
rather than its producer, to decide on them. By
allowing either early or late binding on questions
of presentation, electronic editions force their crea-
tors to decide when certain choices must be made. If
those choices are to be left to the reader, it will be
necessary to consider how they are to be made and
what alternatives are to be offered.
The possibilities for mutability in electronic edi-
tions will require a great deal of editorial theory to
be rebuilt. A large part of editorial theory to date has
occupied itself with identifying and weighing the
relative merits of various choices among alternative
positions; these positions have been seen as mutu-
ally exclusive, and as requiring an early-bound deci-
sion by the editor, rather than a late-bound decision
by the reader. But they are mutually exclusive only
for static editions; a dynamic edition can allow the
reader, rather than the editor, to choose among
them. Should the base text be the editor’s critical
text, or that of a particular witness? Should an appa-
ratus be presented? Which variant readings should
be included?
Editors may justly feel that electronic editions
have translated them from a stable environment
with difficult but well-known problems into a
river of Heraclitean flux, in which everything is
changing from moment to moment, and the
editor and edition are expected to adapt actively
to those changes from moment to moment, without
being able to rely on many of the principles which
used to be stable guides to editorial thinking. Suc-
cessful engagement with the mutability of electronic
editions and the flux of the environment—surviving
the experience of being tossed unceremoniously into
the river—may require a different way of thinking
about editions and the choices they embody.
If editors are to navigate successfully the transi-
tion from static to dynamic edition, if their editions
are to come to terms successfully with the river of
flux into which electronic delivery tosses them, then
the creators of editions must learn to understand the
nature of the flux and how to use dynamic changes
in the edition to deal with it. It no longer suffices to
endow an edition with knowledge; electronic deliv-
ery demands the capability of dealing with mutabil-
ity. It is in this sense that I mean the reference in
my title. By teaching an edition how to swim, I mean
endowing an edition not only with a store of factual
knowledge concerning the work presented, but also
with the capability of dealing gracefully with the
mutability of the electronic medium, by exploiting
the possibilities for reader-controlled changes to the
edition’s presentation and by adapting successfully
to rapid changes in the hardware and software
environment.
The nature of this knowledge and adaptability
can be seen more clearly if we distinguish between
two kinds of ‘knowing’. The English verb know is
anomalous among the Germanic languages; its
direct cognates have disappeared from the other
Germanic languages, but know was well established
in English by 1200. As the OED says,
The verb has since had a vigorous life, having
also occupied with its meaning the original
territory of the vb. wit, Ger. wissen, and that
of can, so far as this meant to ‘know’. Hence
Eng. know covers the ground of Ger. wissen,
kennen, erkennen, and (in part) ko¨nnen, of Fr.
connaıˆtre and savoir, of L. novisse, co-gnoscere,
and scire . . .
We can distinguish, with the aid of the other
languages, several types of knowledge, of which
two are relevant here: on the one hand, a knowledge
of facts normally transmissible by language
(German Wissen), and on the other the knowledge
of how to do something (German Ko¨nnen).
Through the former, one may know a great deal
about how buoyancy, arm strength, and different
types of kick may contribute to efficient swimming:
the kind of expert knowledge that Mark Spitz’s
coaches no doubt possessed. The latter is what
Mark Spitz himself knew about swimming: how
to actually do it, how to translate thought and
knowledge into action. Both kinds of knowledge
are essential to the electronic edition—and unlike
the print edition, the electronic edition can (and
indeed must) incorporate both: the electronic
edition can not only know all of the information
that is captured as part of its fundamental data,
but can also possess information about how that
data interacts, how it can be presented, how it
behaves.
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
30 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
Knowledge, as I shall use the term here, is a
relatively static, immutable body of propositional
information. It can be more or less readily para-
phrased in declarative sentences. What an edition
knows is a large body of facts about the work
edited, its genesis and/or transmission, etc.
Capability, by contrast, is the capacity to do
things. It is intimately connected to dynamic phe-
nomena, to the way things happen in time, and thus
to mutability. What an electronic edition can do will
involve interaction with the reader, adjustment
to user options, and the like. Textually, it may be
expressed in a series of imperative sentences. In
practice, capability is intimately connected with
the execution of software, and as both theoretical
computer science and several decades of practical
software development soberly attest, capability is
not necessarily subject to paraphrase.
Given a suitable declarative notation for knowl-
edge, that is, it is in principle possible and usually
straightforward as a matter of practice to translate
the knowledge into another notation. Given an
executable program, it is in principle not universally
possible to recognize what it does without running
the program, and in practice it is notoriously diffi-
cult to understand executable code or to replicate it
in a different notation. The difference is important
because in practice some information can be cap-
tured either in a declarative or in an imperative
formulation. The declarative form lends itself to
paraphrase and thus tends to be more software-
and hardware-independent, while the imperative
form tends to be tightly bound to specific pieces
of executable software and to resist successful
paraphrase.
It will be useful to distinguish three things, which
in the following discussion I will refer to simply as
the facts, the selection, and the presentation.
 There is an infinite set of facts related to the
work being edited. Some are directly observable,
some are not directly observable but are recover-
able by inference or intuition, and some are
irrecoverable.
 Any edition records a selection from the observ-
able and the recoverable portions of this infinite
set of facts. This may be thought of as the para-
phrasable information content of the edition,
or the set of inferences we may make from the
edition. An edition may include an apparatus of
variants or not, may provide glosses for some
words or not, may provide historical or literary
annotation or not, etc. Each of these different
styles of edition represents a different selection
from the brute facts.5
 Each edition provides some specific presentation
of its selection: the text is given in a particular
layout and font, the apparatus if any is given at
the bottom of the page (or window) or at the
back of the book (in another window), variant
readings are signaled by Nestle´ symbols or not,6
glosses are presented in the margin or in a free-
standing glossary, etc.
The selection and presentation of an edition
together constitute what may be called its interface:
the face it presents to its reader.7
Mutability (or dynamic change) is the funda-
mental condition of the electronic delivery of edi-
tions; it is visible at several levels. The facts from
which the edition selects are themselves in some
sense mutable; this is true for all editions, not only
for electronic editions. New manuscripts of a work
will sometimes come to light. Different scholars,
especially scholars from different generations, will
assess the relevance and the recoverability of various
facts differently. Be´dier revolutionized the editing
of Old French, for example, by his declaration that
reliable manuscript stemmata are not reconstructi-
ble, and that the text of the archetype, and a for-
tiori that of the author, are thus unrecoverable.8
Later editors have in some cases moved the argu-
ment further, taking the view that even if the arche-
type were reconstructible, it is less important for the
study of the work than a synoptic view of the entire
textual tradition in which the work was dissemi-
nated. This observable fluctuation in scholarly
views of the relevant and available factual record is
surely responsible in part for the gradual decline in
the idea of a definitive edition. The immutability of
the print edition makes it hard for print editions to
represent or adapt to the mutability of the facts.
At the level of the interface, the mutability inher-
ent in electronic delivery makes it possible to pro-
vide cinematic visual effects, atmospheric sound,
music, film clips of readings or performances, and
How to teach your edition how to swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 31
the like. As more and more such opportunities are
seized, the edition more and more resembles a
movie or television presentation. The exploitation
of synchronized multimedia can make the work
more accessible to readers and help them come
more quickly to grips with the aesthetic nature of
otherwise difficult and inaccessible literary works.9
The edition, or the software in which it is presented,
can further allow for certain kinds of user interac-
tion which affect the presentation: users may
be allowed to change the font or font size (this
is particularly useful in making editions more
accessible to readers with visual handicaps),10 or
even the layout and color scheme of the screen
presentation.
Good interactive design, it must be observed, is a
new challenge to which interface designers have not
yet fully adapted. The first instinct of many
designers, when confronted with the extreme muta-
bility of windows-based user interfaces, is to seek
ways to limit the reader’s freedom in adjusting the
interface; when they succeed, the reader confronts
windows which cannot be resized, fonts which do
not react to requests to enlarge or reduce them, and
a presentation that tends to treat the screen as a
slightly inferior form of paper and the reader as a
passive viewer rather than an active explorer. User
interfaces to electronic editions are more rewarding
when their designers recognize that the design chal-
lenge is not to assume a fixed window size and
layout and create a pleasing static screen based on
those assumptions, but to create a design which
adjusts well and automatically as the reader changes
the window size and aspect ratio, enlarges the font,
etc. It is not formally a requirement that editions
provide interactivity or multimedia design which
adapts to the reader’s changes in this way, but edi-
tions which do not will inevitably seem wooden and
stiff to readers accustomed to well-designed inter-
active multimedia presentations; editions will be
more attractive to readers, and more usable, if
they can swim.
Even more significantly than its presentation, an
edition’s selection from the facts has historically
been determined largely by the editor’s choices
about the audience and purpose of the edition.
The Kelmscott Chaucer and Lachmann’s edition of
Walther discussed above illustrate two different
kinds of selectivity, as well as two different kinds
of presentation. Electronic delivery opens new pos-
sibilities here: the selection of information need not
be fixed once for all by the editor, but can be muta-
ble and changed dynamically by the reader. If the
edition includes an apparatus of variants, for exam-
ple, the software’s user interface can allow the user to
decide whether to display the apparatus or not, and
how to display it. Variant readings can be displayed
in a traditional apparatus (possibly in any of several
conventional styles, positive, negative, with different
punctuation) in a separate window or a separate
frame, or in a synoptic display of the witnesses in
parallel columns or parallel horizontal lines, or in a
variety of other ways.11 If the edition’s selection from
the set of brute facts provides the necessary informa-
tion, it is possible to allow the reader
 to read any witness in its entirety, from begin-
ning to end
 to read (in a genetic edition) the editor’s recon-
struction of a particular version in the genesis of
the text, in clear text, whether that genetic ver-
sion is identical to the text offered by any doc-
umentary witness or not
 to examine the genesis of the work, as hypothe-
sized by the editor, by means of a dynamic illus-
tration of textual layers12
 to jump from the transcription of any witness to
its photographic reproduction
 to shift from any point in one witness or version
of the work to the corresponding location in any
other version
 to have two or more versions on the screen scrol-
ling in parallel
 to display any witness, version, or editorial
reconstruction we choose as the base text, and
have an apparatus in traditional form at the
bottom of the screen or in a separate window,
which scrolls along in sequence with the base text
 to have two or more witnesses on screen, with a
common apparatus keyed to either one, or with
an apparatus for each
 to make the apparatus selective by witness
(showing only selected manuscripts) or by type
of variation (e.g. suppressing all purely ortho-
graphic variants)
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
32 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 to show the entire tradition in line-by-line
synoptic form
 to use special symbols (e.g. symbols similar to
those used in the Nestle´ Greek New Testament)
to provide a visible signal in the base text of
entries in the apparatus, or to provide a base
text clear of such intrusions
 to show the text in old-spelling or new-spelling
form
 to display glosses in the margin, or at the bottom
of the window, or in a separate window, with or
without markers on glossed words to signal the
availability of a gloss
 to display annotation (or markers indicating the
availability of notes) selectively by type: glosses,
explanations of linguistic difficulties, text-critical
notes, notes on historical background, literary
analysis, etc.
Note that the capabilities offered by the presen-
tation layer of an electronic edition depend in part
upon the selection of facts represented in the edi-
tion. And conversely, an editor’s selection of infor-
mation to record in the edition may be influenced
by the interface foreseen for the edition. The user
can control whether and how glosses are presented
only if the edition provides glosses, and similarly
for other forms of annotation, variant readings,
normalized spelling, and the reconstruction of ver-
sions representing stages of the work’s genesis.
Because delivery software can filter the body of
information contained in the edition at the time
of reading, the same edition can be used to generate
the forms of presentation thought most useful to
beginning students, to advanced students, or to spe-
cialists with various interests. It is thus no longer
necessary to choose once for all between the aesthe-
tically oriented, apparatus-free presentation embod-
ied by the Kelmscott Chaucer and the functional
presentation illustrated by Lachmann’s Walther.
Nor is it necessary to perpetuate the not wholly
satisfactory compromises characteristic of some
recent American scholarly editing (include the
apparatus, but present it in the least convenient
way possible, separated from the base text but in
the same volume, so that text and apparatus
simply cannot be viewed together without buying
two copies). It is possible to provide both views of
the work, with and without the apparatus, in the
same electronic edition. A multi-purpose edition
can be created simply by including all the informa-
tion needed for each purpose (typically there will be
more or less overlap) and providing a suitable user
interface for each.
Many editors will find the dynamic filtering of
information a siren song, re-awakening in them the
dream of an ultimately complete edition, which
contains everything a reader of the work might
need or wish to consult: medievalists, classicists,
and Bible scholars may find themselves dreaming
about editions with full transcriptions of every tex-
tual witness, with full paleographic detail; moder-
nists may set about the construction of archival
editions with photographic reproductions of every
authorial draft and every edition with any possible
claim to authority; literary historians may indulge
themselves in providing full-text access not only to
the work at the center of their edition, but to its
literary sources, potential sources, analogues, and to
literary works for which it, in turn, has served as a
source.13 It may be worth stressing, therefore, that
however we enlarge the selection of facts recorded in
an edition or archive, it remains inescapably a selec-
tion. Electronic delivery mechanisms do not impose
quite the same tax on additional material as does
book printing, and dynamic filtering of the content
can help keep the reader from being overwhelmed
by the volume of material. But it should be noted
that making an edition capable of serving multi-
ple purposes may require more additional effort
than first appears. A well-done study edition of an
important work is not simply a scholarly edition
minus the apparatus: it will require a different appa-
ratus of its own, with annotations and glosses (and
perhaps a new-spelling text) suitable for the audi-
ence. Even in the electronic world, it appears, the
editor will need to make choices, and the edition
will be a record of those choices. Absolute com-
pleteness remains a chimera.
The underlying structural fact about editions
which are capable of serving multiple purposes
is that they successfully separate the data—their
knowledge of facts—from any specific behavior
based on that data, and they separate both from
the specific machinery and tools which present this
How to teach your edition how to swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 33
information to the reader. This separation turns
out to be crucial not only for this reason, but also
because it allows the edition to stay afloat in yet
another kind of flux. It is not only the user interface
and the selection of facts presented in the edition
which are mutable: the hardware and software
substrate used in electronic delivery of editions are
themselves mutable, and their mutability threatens
the longevity of electronic editions.
Scholars have learned recently to beware of acid
paper and the potential that books printed on it will
fall apart with use and age unless active steps are
taken to preserve them. To forestall this problem,
printed scholarly editions are nowadays printed on
paper designed to last 300 years or longer without
chemical deterioration. But if they are tied to a spe-
cific piece of software, electronic editions risk the
equivalent of publication on paper so acidic that
it decomposes in 15 or 20 years. Both the hard-
ware and the software marketplaces change quickly:
today’s hit machine is tomorrow’s slowpoke; today’s
standard software is tomorrow’s rarity. Some early
literary hypertexts are now in the gradual process of
becoming unreadable, as the hardware/software
configuration for which they were originally written
become rarer. Hypercard, which was released for the
first time in 1986, was last updated in 1998;
although as I write this Hypercard readers are still
available, they are incompatible with some newer
hardware, so that Hypercard stacks are unrunnable
on some current machines. IRIS Intermedia, the
first version of which became available in 1985,
was orphaned in 1992 when the Brown University
Institute for Research in Information and Scholar-
ship, which developed it, was shut down. The Dyna-
Text browser, which combined strong hypertext
capabilities with the ability to work with SGML-
encoded documents, was effectively on the market
for only a decade or so. For editorial projects which
hope to produce editions which will serve readers
for more than a few years, and which themselves
may have lifetimes measured in decades, it is clearly
dangerous to tie the edition too closely to a single
piece of software or hardware.
To survive for more than a few years, an edition
must thus be able to survive in the constant flux of
hardware and software. There is of course no
absolute requirement that an edition be able to
swim in this sense. Editors seldom believe nowadays
in a ‘definitive’ edition, nor hope to create an edi-
tion which will never need to be replaced. An edi-
tion, it is often now said, is the reflex of a particular
point of view, at a particular time. New times, we
say, will always require new editions. It is thus pos-
sible, at least in theory, to view with equanimity the
prospect of an edition becoming inaccessible to
readers because its software layer no longer runs
on currently available computer systems. It does
not matter, we might say, that the edition is no
longer available. It did once exist, at the time for
which it was intended. And after its time has
passed, surely (we might ask) there is no point in
trying to extend its lifetime by artificial means?
In practice, it would seem that most editors may
well wish for the first fascicle of their electronic
edition still to be working when they issue the
final fascicle; some may hope that their editions
will still be usable on the day the editor retires.
Editions made for the moment may also be of inter-
est after that moment has passed, not perhaps as the
most reliable guide to the work, but as a guide to the
reception of the work, or to the moment for which
the edition was created.14 Editors who harbor such
hopes will need to be careful in the organization of
their editorial work, because experience shows
clearly that the average longevity of text browsing
software does not meet such demands. Note that
it is not a matter of making a better choice of soft-
ware, or of devising a superior user interface for it:
what is required is that the edition strictly limit its
dependency on any single piece of software, and that
the creators of editions plan for the obsolescence of
their delivery systems.
If, as I have suggested above, it is the mutability
of electronic editions which poses the greatest chal-
lenge for the would-be creators of electronic edi-
tions, then are there specific steps that editors can
take in order to meet that challenge in all its various
forms? There are. The remarks which follow are not
exhaustive, but will provide, I hope, useful guidance
for the perplexed.
Editors can and should exploit the mutability or
dynamism of the edition’s interface for editorial
purposes: an edition which responds interactively
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
34 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
to the reader and provides information in multiple
media can provide a more persuasive aesthetic
experience of the work, as well as a more useful
tool for study. The literature on user interfaces
may usefully be consulted.15 Existing user interfaces,
both for editions and other text browsing/display
applications, and those of other software applica-
tions, may provide inspiration for rethinking the
interface of the edition. In addition to user inter-
faces in the strict sense, the larger field of informa-
tion design may repay consideration.16
Electronic editions can serve multiple audiences
much more conveniently than print editions can.
Success in this endeavor will require that the
editor carefully analyze the kinds of information
and the styles of presentation needed by different
readers or for different purposes. Existing principles
of editorial theory should in principle be helpful
here, but some parts of current theory are tainted
by silent (and perhaps unconscious) assumptions
based on the immutability of print editions.17
The information content of the edition should be
recorded in declarative terms, as knowledge, inde-
pendent of the expected presentation, avoiding
reference to presentation details and imperative
phrasing. The selection of information to be cap-
tured in the edition will be affected not only by
the editor’s evaluation of the documentary record
but also by the intended interface. If, in the course
of preparing an edition or a particular interface, one
decides unexpectedly that certain lemmata or var-
iant readings should be displayed in red, one may
need to revise the encoding of the text to ensure that
those lemmata or variants are distinguishable from
the others in some way. This is a straightforward
piece of document analysis: the fact that the deci-
sion comes late in the process does not change its
nature. It would be wise, because more generally
useful, to ask oneself what it is which sets these
readings apart from the others, and to tag them
accordingly, instead of adding a red tag to the
encoded text. In a different interface, those readings
may be colored blue instead of red; a third may be
designed for color-blind readers who need a differ-
ent form of visual signal.
The form in which the edition records informa-
tion will also be affected by the intended
presentation. Users of XML markup not infrequently
find themselves having to choose among several pos-
sible ways of expressing the same information; this is
a function of the richness of practical markup vocab-
ularies and the existence of multiple points of view
from which a given piece of information may be
understood. When facing such a choice, one might
choose a particular way of encoding the information
in order to ensure that the delivery software can pro-
duce a particular desired presentational effect with it.
If the several methods of expression are truly synon-
ymous with each other,18 then there is, in principle,
no objection to making the choice on these grounds.
It is a serious mistake, however, to allow one’s
expected delivery software to distort one’s under-
standing of the text, or one’s encoding scheme.19
The textual information, however, can and
should be distinguished rigorously from its intended
presentation. Being able to provide a declarative
description of this information, without reference
to presentation, is a useful test of whether the infor-
mation has been kept sufficiently distinct from pre-
sentational issues.20
It is desirable (although the practice is neither
widespread in electronic editions nor predominant
in software development) to provide more than
one interface to the edition. In software develop-
ment terms, the interface is taken care of by a
front end, while the information presented resides
in a back end. Providing multiple interfaces to
the edition amounts, in these terms, to providing
more than one front end to the same back end.
Multiple front ends have two potential advantages.
Most obviously, they can support different ways
of working with the text, different cognitive styles
in the reader or student, different interests. One
interface might focus on the aesthetic experience
of the work, another on its literary-historical back-
ground, another might focus on issues of textual
variation or textual genesis, another on linguistic
questions. It may be possible in theory to provide
access to all of these different subject matters from
the same interface, but (as illustrated by Morris’s
Chaucer) some forms of interface benefit if they
are not obligated to refer the reader to other possi-
ble interfaces but can concentrate on providing a
self-contained experience.
How to teach your edition how to swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 35
Multiple interfaces can also help the editor
ensure that the core information in the edition is
in fact recorded declaratively and without exces-
sively tight binding to any particular style of pre-
sentation. When different interfaces are designed to
present the same information in different ways, it
is easier to focus on the common declarative non-
presentational interpretation of the information and
easier to detect failures to separate information
from presentation.21
Within any single interface, general principles of
user interface design should be applied. Default
behaviors should be set to cater to the novice or
the first-time user of the edition. Some aspects of
the user interface (e.g. some of the more arcane
user-settable options) will need to remain unobtru-
sive so that they do not confuse the novice. They
should not, however, be made completely inacces-
sible unless this is intrinsic to the design of the
specific interface: it should be possible for readers
who have become very familiar with the edition’s
interface and have specialized requirements to
exploit the mutability of the edition’s interface
to the fullest, so that they can meet those
requirements.
It is probably desirable, although in the cur-
rent state of computing knowledge difficult, to
separate the design of the presentation layer of the
editions interface into a declarative description of
the presentation desired and a separate software
layer which provides the actual interface to the
reader, guided by the declarative description. Note
that this amounts to capturing as much of the pre-
sentation layer as possible in declarable, expressible
knowledge, leaving as little reliance on pure
capability as possible. In practice, this division is
today only partially possible: stylesheets can and
should be used to ensure device independence of
the delivery mechanisms and to capture as much
presentation information as possible in declarative
form. Current stylesheet formalisms are notoriously
weak, however, in providing declarative descriptions
of interactive behaviors: they are much better devel-
oped for static aspects of presentation than for the
dynamic aspects.
The separation of information from its presenta-
tion, and the provision of multiple interfaces, will be
substantially easier if the core information of the
edition in encoded is a declarative, non-procedural
form. SGML (the Standard Generalized Markup
Language) or its subset XML (the Extensible
Markup Language) are obvious possible choices,
although some of their crucial advantages can also
be achieved with other markup schemes. The
Perseus Project and Peter Robinson’s Canterbury
Tales project both encoded their textual material
in SGML and translated it into non-SGML form
for delivery with specific software at the time of
issue. As the software packages initially used inevi-
tably fall out of favor and into disuse, the editions
themselves can readily be re-issued in newer soft-
ware. The Wittgenstein Archive at the University of
Bergen similarly practices a sharp distinction
between the core of the edition and its presentation.
The project devised its own markup scheme, the
Multi-Element Code System (MECS), and markup
vocabulary (MECS-WIT) for the transcription of
Ludwig Wittgenstein’s notebooks. Because the
markup is declarative and independent of any par-
ticular style of presentation, it supports a variety of
interfaces, from diplomatic transcriptions of the
notebooks with precise attention to details of the
inscription to normalized-spelling fair-copy displays
of the text.22 Unless there is a good reason to do
otherwise, it is probably advisable to use an exist-
ing publicly documented markup vocabulary for
editions, such as that developed by the Text Encod-
ing Initiative (TEI), or the TEI extension developed
by the Model Editions Partnership (MEP), or a
further local adaptation of these.23
Non-textual data should be archived in non-
proprietary, publicly documented data formats;
these have much greater longevity than privately
controlled formats. If necessary, the data can be
translated into a proprietary format for delivery
with specific software, thus introducing a sharp dis-
tinction between the archival and delivery forms of
the edition; this is in any case a useful distinction to
make. Use of non-proprietary formats has as a side
effect that it will normally be easier for the editor or
others to integrate new material into an edition,
thus ameliorating some of the drawbacks associated
with the need for a fixed and immutable selection of
core content in an edition. An open edition can be
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
36 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
hospitable to the incorporation of new material and
thus adapt more successfully to the mutability of the
documentary and factual record.
Scholarly editions have historically had the task
of documenting and correcting for the mutability of
texts as transmitted from author through copyist or
typesetter to reader. There is perhaps an irony in the
observation that in order to serve their purposes in a
new medium, they must not resist but must
embrace and learn to exploit mutability for their
own purposes. Some editors will surely find it
distressing to discover that they must endow their
editions not only with a solid basis of factual knowl-
edge, but must also give them the capability of doing
things interactively with the reader.
The times are changing. We had better start
swimming, or we’ll sink like a stone.
Notes
The talk from which this essay was derived was given
under the title ‘Why you should not teach your edition
how to swim’; after some soul-searching, and with some
misgivings, I have retained the metaphor, which seems to
have stuck in the auditors’ minds, but reversed its polar-
ity. The argument has benefited considerably from dis-
cussion at the Conference on Editorial Problems, and in
particular from the comments of Julia Flanders, Franc¸ois
LaChance, and Peter Robinson. The author is grateful for
encouragement and advice received, during the revision
for this volume, from Julia Flanders and from Fred
Unwalla, whose patience has been beyond all saying.
1 The images are reproduced from The Works of
Geoffrey Chaucer: A Facsimile of the William Morris
Kelmscott Chaucer with the original 87 illustrations by
Edward Burne-Jones, together with an introduction by
John T. Winterich. Cleveland and New York: World
Publishing Company, 1958, p. 104.
2 The images are reproduced from Die Gedichte Walthers
von der Vogelweide: Studienausgabe herausgegeben
von Karl Lachmann; dreizehnte, aufgrund der zehnten,
von Carl von Kraus bearbeiteten Ausgabe, neu heraus-
gegeben von Hugo Kuhn. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1965,
pp. 8–9.
3 An informative summary of Lachmann’s work as an
editor of Middle and Old High German works can be
found in Hendricus Sparnaay, Karl Lachmann als
Germanist. Bern: Francke, 1948.
4 Two exceptions to this characterization may be worth
noting. At the cost of some effort any reader can add
marginal or external annotations and variant readings.
And in the case of the Walther edition, or any edition
with an apparatus of variants, a sufficiently energetic
reader can reconstruct an alternative text, e.g. an
approximation of the text offered by each manuscript
witness. Such an exercise involves a great deal of to and
fro between the base text and the apparatus, which gives
the base text a psychological prominence which may
be out of keeping with its textual importance. Since it
remains easier and more convenient to read the base
text than to reconstruct an alternative text from the
apparatus, any edition with a single base text and appa-
ratus can hardly escape biasing its readers toward its
base text, however that base text is arrived at by the
editor and whatever the claims the editor may make or
avoid making for it. Here, the selectivity of Lachmann’s
apparatus means that for the witnesses to Walther only
an approximation to the text of any given witness is
possible in any case.
5 Some readers may wonder what to make of the term
fact, which seems to ascribe somewhat more certainty to
the contents of editions and the judgments of their edi-
tors than is always warranted. An editor may be unde-
cided which variant reading to prefer, or uncertain how
to read a smudged page, or hesitant about the meaning
of a hard place; surely we should not ignore these cases
when characterizing the contents of the edition? I am
taking the term fact here with a rather large denotation
and do not mean, by using it, to exclude cases of uncer-
tainty from our consideration. If one wishes to insist
that the term fact necessarily involves a claim of cer-
tainty, then we may perhaps reconcile ourselves to the
term by observing that in the cases described it is a
wholly certain fact that the editor is uncertain in the
ways described, the nature of the arguments seen to
bear on the case is also a fact, and editions can in fact
record both the uncertainty and the arguments on
either side of such a decision. In any case, nothing in
the argument relies on the ‘facts’ recorded in an edition
having any particular degree of certainty; on the con-
trary, the certainty attributed to the facts or proposi-
tional content of an edition is itself mutable, and it is
somewhat easier for electronic editions to come to
terms with this mutability than for print editions.
6 These are graphic symbols appearing in the base text,
which call attention to the presence of variants in the
apparatus; different shapes are used to signal one- and
multi-word variants, additional text in other versions,
text missing in other versions, and transpositions.
Their name derives from their use in Eberhard and
How to teach your edition how to swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 37
Erwin Nestle´’s editions of the Greek New Testament,
although similar symbols have also been used in New
Testament editions at least since the 1880s.
7 I am indebted to Julia Flanders for the suggestion that
it could be useful to generalize from the software
notion of user interfaces to a broader concept which
includes the analogous features of print editions.
8 Be´dier, J. (1928). La tradition manuscrite du Lai de
l’Ombre: Reflexions sur l’art d’e´diter les anciens texts.
Romania, 54: 161–196, 321–356.
9 Michael Groden’s edition James Joyce’s Ulysses in
Hypermedia (project home page at http://publish.
uwo.ca/mgroden/ulysses/) is a well known project
which works hard to exploit the opportunities offered
by synchronized multimedia presentation. It is sugges-
tive that Groden is identified not as an editor but as
the ‘Director’ of the project.
10 A full account of accessibility issues is not possible
here; the interested reader should consult, among
others, the World Wide Web Consortium’s guidelines
on this topic: Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0,
Chisholm, W., Vanderheiden, G. and Jacobs, I. (eds),
W3C Recommendation 5 May 1999 (Cambridge,
Sophia-Antipolis, and Tokyo: World Wide Web
Consortium, 1999), available online at http://www.
w3.org/TR/WAI-WEBCONTENT/; Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, Ben Caldwell et al. (eds),
W3C Working Draft 22 August 2002. Cambridge,
Sophia-Antipolis, and Tokyo: World Wide Web
Consortium, 2002, online at http://www.w3.org/TR/
WCAG20/; User Agent Accessibility Guidelines 1.0,
Jacobs, I. Gunderson, J. and Hansen, E. (eds),
W3C Proposed Recommendation 16 October 2002.
Cambridge, Sophia-Antipolis, and Tokyo: World
Wide Web Consortium, 2002, online at http://
www.w3.org/TR/UAAG10/; XML Accessibility Guide-
lines, Dardailler, D., Palmer, S. B. and
McCathieNevile, C. (eds), W3C Working Draft
3 October 2002. Cambridge, Sophia-Antipolis, and
Tokyo: World Wide Web Consortium, 2002, online
at http://www.w3.org/TR/xag. General information
may be found at the home page of the W3C Web
Accessibility Initiative (http://www.w3.org/WAI/).
11 For proposals on the display of variants, see (inter alia)
Steer, G. (1968). Grundsa¨tzliche U¨berlegungen und
Vorschla¨ge zur Rationalisierung des Lesartenapparats.
In Kuhn, H., Stackmann, K. and Wuttke, D. (eds),
Kolloquium u¨ber Probleme altgermanistischer
Editionen. Marbach am Neckar, 26. u. 27. Apr. 1966.
Referate und Diskussionsbeitra¨ge. Wiesbaden: Franz
Steiner Verlag, pp. 34–41, and for an argument against
the use of apparatus see Ijsewijn, J. (1977) Companion
to Neo-Latin Studies. Amsterdam, New York, Oxford:
North-Holland, chapter 4.
12 Jean-Louis Lebrave’s prototype genetic edition of
Flaubert’s He´rodias provides a vivid illustration of
possibilities in this vein; see LeBrave, J.-L. (1991).
‘L’hypertexte et l’avant-texte’ in Texte et ordinateur:
les mutations du lire-e´crire : Actes du colloque interdis-
ciplinaire tenu a` l’Universite´ Paris X Nanterre, 6–8 juin
1990, sous la direction de Jacques Anis et Jean-Louis
Lebrave. La Garenne-Colombes: E´ditions de l’Espace
Europe´en, pp. 101–117; LeBrave, J.-L. (1997).
‘Hypertexte et e´dition ge´ne´tique: l’exemple
d’He´rodias de Flaubert,’ in Banques de donne´es et
hypertextes pour l’e´tude du roman, sous la direction
de Nathalie Ferrand. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France, pp. 137–154; and Zeller, Z. and Martens, G.
(eds) (1998). ‘Hypertext und textgenetische Edition’
in Textgenetische Edition, Tu¨bingen: Max Niemeyer
Verlag, pp. 329–45. Another useful exploration of
the problems of electronic genetic editions, with
more emphasis on practical issues and their solutions,
can be found in Rischer, T. (1997). ‘Eine TEI/SGML-
Edition der textkritischen Ausgabe von James Joyce
Ulysses’. Diplomarbeit, TU Mu¨nchen.
13 The endeavors described here in the conditional are
not fanciful. The history of computing in the human-
ities is full of projects whose salient character is their
relative completeness in comparison with their pre--
electronic forebears. In addition to Roberto Busa’s
Index Thomisticus (a full concordance, without stop
words, of the complete works of Thomas Aquinas,
as well as all the works once erroneously attributed
to him), and the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (a tran-
scription of the entire extant corpus of ancient Greek),
projects more explicitly identified as editorial in
nature can readily be named here. Hoyt Duggan’s pro-
jected edition of Piers Plowman, described in Duggan,
H. N. (1996). ‘Some unrevolutionary aspects of com-
puter editing’, in Finneran, R. J. (ed.), The Literary Text
in the Digital Age, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, pp. 77–98 (and see the project’s home page at
http://www.iath.virginia.edu/seenet/piers/piers-
main.html), and Peter Robinson’s Canterbury Tales
edition, illustrate the reaction postulated of medieval-
ists. Jerome McGann’s Rossetti Archive, described in
‘The Rossetti Archive and image-based electronic edit-
ing’, in The Literary Text in the Digital Age, ed.
Finneran, pp. 145–183, is a prominent example of the
archival impulse. As examples of the literary-historical
desire to accumulate massive annotation and collec-
tions of parallel texts, one might mention Michael
Groden’s project for a hypertextual Joyce edition
C. M. Sperberg-McQueen
38 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
(project home page at http://publish.uwo.ca/
mgroden/ulysses/) and the print and CD-ROM edi-
tion Der junge Goethe in seiner Zeit: Sa¨mtliche Werke,
Briefe, Tagebu¨cher und Schriften bis 1775, Eibl, K.,
Jannidis, F. and Willems, M. (eds). Frankfurt a.M.,
Leipzig: Insel, 1998.
14 The patristic editions of J.-P. Migne, for example, are
no longer regarded as the best editions for the study
of the Church Fathers: the major authors, and many
of the others, are now available in more reliable edi-
tions. The editions of Migne, however, remain a
milestone in the history of patristics, and an important
source for the history of the reception of patristic
thought. They may no longer be important as editions,
but they remain important as historical monuments
in their own right.
15 A good place to start is Borenstein, N. S. (1991).
Programming as if People Mattered: Friendly
Programs, Software Engineering, and Other Noble
Delusions. Princeton: Princeton University Press, and
the literature cited there.
16 By far the best place to start in this topic is the work
of Edward Tufte: Tufte, E. (2001). The Visual Display
of Quantitative Information, 2nd edn Cheshire,
CT: Graphics Press, Tufte, E. (1990). Envisioning
Information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics Press, and
Tufte, E. (1997). Visual Explanations: Images and
Quantities, Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire,
CT: Graphics Press. Although he focuses on quantita-
tive information, his example can be inspiring also
for those concerned with the display of textual and
other non-numeric information.
17 An outstanding, and in some respects alarming,
example is offered by Tanselle, G. T. (1972).
Some Principles for Editorial Apparatus. Studies in
Bibliography, 25: 41–88, rpt. in his Textual Criticism
and Scholarly Editing. Charlottesville: University Press
of Virginia, 1990, 19–176. Almost none of the princi-
ples Tanselle identifies apply to editions with mutable
interfaces.
18 For a discussion of markup interpretation which
provides a framework within which notions like syno-
nymy can usefully be applied, see Sperberg-McQueen,
C. M. Huitfeldt, C. and Renear, A. (2001).
Meaning and Interpretation of Markup Markup
languages: Theory & practice, 2.3: 215–234. http://
www.w3.org/People/cmsmcq/2000/mim.html
19 On these and other issues relating to markup design,
see the growing literature on SGML, including espe-
cially Maler, E. and d’Andaloussi, J. (1996). Develop-
ing SGML DTDs: From Text to Model to Markup.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR.
20 Some works may require special treatment: the poet
Stefan George insisted that his poetry be presented
only in sans-serif type, never with serifs.
21 Borenstein, Programming as if People Mattered, sug-
gests writing software with multiple user interfaces
for similar reasons. ‘If software provides multiple
user interfaces from the start, it is hard to avoid
making the code separation clean and complete’
(p. 47). In addition, he notes that providing multiple
interfaces makes the gradual evolution of software and
of user interfaces over several releases easier for users
to accept and adjust to: it gives software users more
control over their use of the software. The same argu-
ments, mutatis mutandis, apply to editions and their
interfaces.
22 See Huitfeldt, C. (2000). MECS – A multi-element
code system, in Skriftserie fra Wittgensteinarkivet
ved Universitetet i Bergen. Bergen: WAUB, http://
www.hit.uib.no/claus/mecs/ and Wittgenstein, L.
(1998–1999). Wittgenstein’s Nachlass: The Bergen
Electronic Edition. CD-ROM edition in four volumes.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998–99.
23 For the TEI vocabulary, see Sperberg-McQueen,
C. M. and Burnard, L. (2002). Text Encoding
Initiative, Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and
Interchange (TEI P4), XML-compatible edition
prepared by Syd Bauman, Lou Burnard, Steven
DeRose, and Sebastian Rahtz. Oxford, Providence,
Charlottesville, Bergen: TEI Consortium. The MEP
extension of the TEI vocabulary is documented
in Chesnutt, D. R., Hockey, S. M. and Sperberg-
McQueen, C. M. (1999). Markup Guidelines for
Documentary Editions, working paper of the Model
Editions Partnership, 4 July 1999. Columbia, SC:
Model Editions Partnership, http://adh.sc.edu/Mep
Guide.html and Chesnutt, D. et al. (2002). Model
Editions Partnership reference manual: Tag set docu-
mentation. Columbia, SC: Model Editions Partnership
http://adh.sc.edu/meptsdv1.html.
How to teach your edition how to swim
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 39
