
1 Introduction
The use of corpora that are divided into tempo-
rally ordered stages, so-called diachronic corpora,
is becoming increasingly wide-spread in histor-
ical corpus linguistics (Lindquist and Mair, 2004;
Kohnen, 2006; Lenker and Meurman-Solin, 2007;
amongst many others). This development is partly
due to the fact that more and more resources of this
kind are being developed, especially with regard to
English (Beal et al., 2007). The Helsinki Corpus,
which can be said to have pioneered the genre, has
been substantially expanded, and numerous other
corpora now offer comparable sets of texts that
represent subsequent periods of time in the devel-
opment of a language. Similarly, many studies of
language acquisition have been relying on resources
like the CHILDES corpora (MacWhinney, 2000),
which also allow comparisons between sequentially
ordered periods of time.
Since the comparison of frequency values over
multiple periods of time is a relatively recent prac-
tice, there are few agreed-upon standards of how
observed frequency changes in diachronic data
should be statistically interpreted. This does of
course not mean that this subject has gone unex-
plored. As quantitative analytical methods are cen-
tral to current sociolinguistics, it comes as no
Correspondence:
Martin Hilpert,
Freiburg Institute for
Advanced Studies (FRIAS),
Albertstr. 19,
79104 Freiburg, Germany
E-mail:
martin.hilpert@frias.
uni-freiburg.de
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009.  The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
385
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn012 Advance Access published on 1 September 2008
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
surprise that there have been some variationist
approaches to the analysis of diachronic corpora
(Biber and Burges, 2000; Nevalainen, 2000).
Other suggestions for the quantitative analysis of
diachronic corpus data can be found in Gries and
Hilpert (2008), Hilpert (2006), and Hinneburg et al.
(2007). More often than not, however, frequencies
reported in historical studies merely serve the pur-
pose of illustration and are not subjected to any
further statistical analysis. If illustration alone is
the ultimate goal, then there is nothing to be said
against this practice. However, in this article, we
make the case that there are insights to be gained
from exploratory statistical techniques, which may
reveal phenomena that are not observable through
mere eyeballing of frequency data. Often enough,
trends are not unidirectional, or not strong enough
to be intuitively clear. Trends may also increase or
decrease in strength over time. Whether a trend has
become significantly more pronounced over time
can be a nontrivial question, so that it would
be desirable to have a method of assessment that
is data driven, rather than based on intuitive
judgments. It is the goal of this article to develop
methods of this kind and to explain their applica-
tion with illustrating examples.
The remainder of this article is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 first details some general character-
istics of work with diachronic corpora and then
describes five basic analytical scenarios, discussing
in each case the questions that hinge on observable
frequency developments. Section 3 offers for each of
these scenarios a statistical procedure to assess and
interpret the available information. Section 4 con-
cludes the article and offers an outlook to further
research.
2 Analysis Types for Multistage
Diachronic Corpora
What are the problems that can be approached
through the analysis of diachronic corpora?
To answer this question, we need to discuss some
particulars of the work with such resources.
A diachronic corpus is, first and foremost, a collec-
tion of texts that vary along the parameter of time.1
Along the time axis, the corpus compiler (or the
researcher) makes a number of essentially arbitrary
boundaries to divide the corpus into successive per-
iods. To take an example, the TIME corpus (http://
corpus.byu.edu/time/) is divided into nine periods
that represent decades from the 1920s up to the
first decade of the 21st century. The first period
represents the years 1923–29, the last period repre-
sents the years 2000–06, so that not every period
covers, strictly speaking, a decade. The TIME
corpus holds about 106 million words, divided
into different amounts of words for each decade,
as shown in Table 1 (these frequencies are based
on online searches in December 2007).
The varying sizes for each period necessitate
a normalization of observed raw frequencies into
measures such as instances per million or per
10,000 words, if a frequency development of a
single form, say, the word internet, is to be evalu-
ated. If we are interested in the frequency of
one form relative to another, such as for instance
the frequency of keep with a gerund complement
(e.g. keep moving) relative to the frequencies of
other uses of keep, the varying corpus sizes need
not concern us any further, since the frequency
ratios between these forms can be calculated inde-
pendently of the overall corpus size. The most basic
observation that can be made about the frequency
development of a given form is whether it became
more or less common, or whether it remained
relatively stable. Trivial as this may seem, it is not
always obvious whether an observed trend consti-
tutes a significant development or an accidental
fluctuation in the data. Table 2 illustrates this
problem with five examples from the TIME corpus.
2.1 in
First, let us consider an element like the preposition
in, for which we do not hypothesize to find major
Table 1 Words in the sub-periods of the TIME corpus (in million words)
Time period 1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s
Words (in million) 7.4 12.3 15 16.2 15.7 12.5 11.1 9.4 6.7
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
386 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
frequency developments. Eyeballing the normalized
frequencies seems to confirm that no drastic changes
occurred—we see a moderate increase during the
1950s and 1960s, but after that the frequencies
approximate their earlier values. However, is there
a way to assess more formally whether the develop-
ment represents common fluctuation or whether
it reflects a genuine phenomenon that should not
be dismissed that easily? Put more concisely, is
there a statistical measure that would tell us if
one or more observed frequencies deviate more
strongly from the mean than we could reasonably
expect?
2.2 and
This question can be further illustrated with the
conjunction and, which seems to undergo a slight
increase in frequency over the nine periods of
the TIME corpus. In assessing this trend, the ana-
lyst faces (at least) two possible scenarios: the
null hypothesis would be that we observe common
fluctuation; the more interesting research hypoth-
esis would be that this trend actually has a reason.
One candidate for such a reason would be the
on-going colloquialization of written English
(cf. Leech and Smith, 2006; Mair, 2006; Kohnen,
2007). On the colloquialization hypothesis, complex
patterns of syntactic subordination gradually give
way to paratactic structures, a tendency that would
be consonant with an increase of and in written
corpus data. Since now a theoretical issue is at
stake, we want to determine with the greatest possi-
ble certainty whether the observed frequency
increase could be due to mere chance.
2.3 whom
Of further interest are cases in which it is intuitively
clear that a noteworthy change has occurred.
In such cases, we would like to be able to describe
the dynamics of that change in more precise
terms. To illustrate, the relative pronoun whom,
the third element shown in Table 2, has undergone
a substantial decrease in text frequency since the
1920s. Ideally, we would like to arrive at a more
fine-grained result than just the finding that the
change between then and now is statistically signifi-
cant. From eyeballing the numbers we can derive
the hypothesis that whom really just underwent a
frequency decrease in the first four periods and
remained stable after that. This would allow the
conclusion that the present-day use of whom is con-
fined to a narrow range of contexts, which none-
theless provide a relatively safe ecological niche for
it. Is there statistical evidence that would allow us
to group different periods of the corpus together
and make individual statements about frequency
developments in each of these groups?
2.4 just because . . . doesn’t mean
Another illustration of a dynamic trend is the devel-
opment of the so-called just because . . . doesn’t mean
construction, which is exemplified by sentences
such as Just because they have McDonald’s and
Barbie dolls, we shouldn’t expect they’ll think and
act like Americans. A look at the frequencies shows
that the construction was used with an evenly low
frequency until the 1950s. After that, there is a steady
increase that appears to become greater after 1980.
Table 2 Frequency developments of five expressions in the TIME corpus
1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s
in n 139,528 215,243 294,086 342,866 346,270 251,004 214,784 175,120 129,908
per 10k words 188.72 174.79 196.15 211.07 221.24 200.52 194.32 185.78 192.54
and n 149,434 185,543 285,890 358,437 379,730 283,265 236,864 213,033 157,476
per 10k words 202.11 150.67 190.69 220.66 242.62 226.29 214.29 226.01 233.40
whom n 2000 2987 2737 2419 2675 1972 1463 1486 989
per 10k words 2.71 2.43 1.83 1.49 1.71 1.58 1.32 1.58 1.47
just because n 4 5 7 7 16 11 14 27 26
per 10k words 0.005 0.004 0.005 0.004 0.010 0.009 0.013 0.029 0.039
keep V-ing n 97 251 613 939 782 599 585 727 523
keep other n 2658 5433 9205 10,012 8902 5821 4564 4157 3425
% keep V-ing 0.04 0.04 0.06 0.09 0.08 0.09 0.11 0.15 0.13
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 387
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
As with the data for whom, we would like to be able
to capture significant differences between stages in
the development of the construction.
2.5 keep
The above examples concern only frequency
changes of individual linguistic forms. Some
cases merit simultaneous attention to the frequency
developments of two or more forms, as such a per-
spective can shed light on commonly encountered
scenarios of grammatical change. An illustrating
example from English is the verb keep, which has
a number of lexical senses relating to the idea of
retaining a state (keep quiet), object (keep the
money), or location (keep off), but which in con-
junction with a gerund complement has come to
express the grammatical category of continuative
aspect, as in He keeps telling me about his problems.
From a quantitative perspective, it would be inter-
esting to see whether the ratio of examples in which
keep takes a gerund complement has increased over
time. Table 2 shows that this is indeed the case.
Whereas, the form keep V-ing only accounts for
4% of all uses of keep in the 1920s, its relative
frequency compared to other uses of keep has
more than tripled in the 1990s and 2000s.
3 Analysis Techniques for
Multistage Diachronic Corpora
Facing the kind of data described in the previous
section, the obvious question is how one is to char-
acterize the development of the words/phrases over
time, which raises the following issues:
 Is there one overall trend in the data and how do
we find that out?
 If there is any one overall trend, what kind of
trend is it: upwards, downwards, or stable?
 Are there several sections or parts in the data that
exhibit commonalities that set them apart from
other parts of the data and how do we find that
out?
In the following sections, we will discuss several
different approaches to these questions. We think
that these approaches are best followed in a
step-by-step fashion, which is why our exposition
here will have a manual-like character even if for
reasons of space we cannot discuss all approaches
with all five expressions. The common denominator
of all these approaches is that they are all bottom-up/
data-driven in the sense that we try to minimize the
effect of subjective preconceptions of individual
researchers. Further, the approaches are quantitative
in the sense that they are based on statistical meth-
ods. While we admit that this entails a certain degree
of technicality, (1) fields other than linguistics have
long been using much more complex techniques
than the ones we outline below, and (2) we believe
that the diagnostic value and the degree of objectivity
that comes with such approaches makes these
approaches worth their while. We will discuss a
method to determine whether the data as a whole
exhibit a particular trend in Section 3.1; two
methods to determine whether there are additional
sub-structures in the data (one of these will be based
on pairwise differences between successive observed
values in Section 3.2; the other will be based on the
observed values as such in Section 3.3); and a
method for the analysis of interrupted trends in
Section 3.4.
Some of the example discussion below is easier to
understand on the basis of visualized data, so let us
first show how the development over time of the
five expressions looks like in simple scatterplots.
Consider Fig.1, where the x-axis represents the pas-
sage of time and the y-axis represents the observed
frequencies of the expressions we have discussed
above. For in, and, whom, and just because, the
y-axis represents tokens per 10,000 words, for keep
V-ing, the y-axis shows its relative frequency com-
pared to other uses of keep. The solid lines indicate
the developments of the frequencies over time; the
dashed lines are nonparametric smoothers summa-
rizing the developmental trends.
3.1 The detection of trends
The first analytical step is to look at the simplest
question: is there one overall trend in the data?
The simplest conceivable approach to answer this
question involves the use of rank-order correlations.
Does the sequential order of the different corpus
periods correlate with a ranking of some kind?
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
388 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
For each of our examples, we have nine data points,
their relative frequencies. A perfect upwards trend
would mean that each observed frequency at time
point x would be higher than that at time point
x 1, and of course the reverse would hold for a
downwards trend. A wide-spread mea-
sure for correlations are coefficients such as the Pear-
son product-moment correlation or Kendall’s-.
Since the former presupposes interval data and
is more sensitive to outliers than the latter, we
Fig. 1 Scatterplots representing the developments of frequencies
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 389
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
will use Kendall’s- here. Correlating the sequence of
corpus sub-periods (1–9) with the relative frequen-
cies from Table 2 above produces correlation coeffi-
cients for each example, which are shown in
Table 3.2 A value close to 0 indicates the absence of
a trend, values approaching either 1 or 1 indicate
that the passage of time correlates perfectly with an
increase or decrease in frequency.
The results in Table 3 provide a first indication of
what may be relevant. They show, for example, that
in does not exhibit any trend at all, that and exhibits
an intermediate trend that is marginally significant,
while the other expressions exhibit very significant
upward trends (just because and keep V-ing) and
downward trends (whom). These are of course
no earth-shaking results, since the numbers merely
confirm to some degree what one would have rea-
sonably inferred from the graph. However, even
here the statistical evaluation already goes beyond
what eyeballing the graph can do. First, it would be
hard to guess from the graph alone that the trend
for and is only marginally significant. Second, it
would be hard to compare the strengths of the
trends of whom and just because—only the numbers
tell that the former is slightly weaker than the latter.
3.2 Variability-based neighbor clustering
with the actual values
The second step in our ‘manual’ is to investigate the
internal quantitative structure of the data in more
detail. Knowing whether there is or is not a trend is
good, but far from sufficiently precise. Thus, this
step needs to be done regardless of whether there
is a trend in the data or not:
 if there is a trend, then the correlation coeffi-
cient from above does not reveal what the exact
nature of the trend is like: even if Kendall’s-
is significant, the trend may not be linear
(which can often already be gleaned from
the scatterplot); also, the trend may involve
different steps or parts;
 if there is no overall trend, there may still be
identifiable structure in the data that is worth
exploring.
The second step is variability-based neighbor
clustering (VNC), a method that was originally
developed for the identification of stages in tempo-
rally ordered data in language acquisition (cf. Stoll
and Gries, forthcoming) and diachronic linguistics
(cf. Gries and Hilpert, 2008), but that can also be
used as a more general heuristic to identify struc-
tures in different kinds of data. VNC is
a hierarchical cluster-analytic approach, but unlike
regular clustering methods, it takes into account
the temporal ordering of the data. Thus, it groups
together data from different time periods on the
basis of their similarity, but only merges data
points that are immediately adjacent (hence ‘neigh-
bor’ clustering), effectively preserving the temporal
order that characterizes language acquisition data
or diachronic historical corpora.
While we cannot discuss all aspects of VNC here
(cf. the above references for details), a brief char-
acterization of the iterative algorithm is in order,
which we show in Algorithm 1 in pseudocode.
Like most iterative algorithms, such procedures
unfortunately do not lend themselves well to a char-
acterization in prose.
The output of VNC is a kind of dendrogram
familiar from regular clustering approaches, which
plots the amalgamation of the nine time periods
such that the y-axis represents the similarities
between different data points and clusters. Let us
explore what this algorithm has to offer given two
examples from the present data, starting with the
example of just because. On the first iteration in
lines 2 and 3, VNC accesses the first and the
second time period (1920: 0.005 and 1930: 0.004)
and computes the variation coefficient of these two
values (0.1571). It proceeds to do the same for all
successive pairs of values, the second and the third,
the third and the fourth, etc. always storing the
variation coefficients. After that, in line 6 VNC
identifies the smallest variation coefficient, which
indicates the values that are most similar to each
other and thus merit being merged first into
Table 3 Kendall’s  for the relative frequencies of the five
expressions and nine time periods
in and whom just
because
keep
V-ing
Kendall’s  0 0.5 0.704 0.743 0.857
Ptwo-tailed 1 0.075 0.008 0.005 0.001
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
390 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
one group. In the first iteration, this is the pair of
values at 1960 and 1970, whose variation coefficient
is 0.0744. In lines 7 to 9, VNC then merges the two
data points by computing the means of the data
points (0.0095) and the years (1965). Thus, after
first iteration, there are not nine data points any-
more, but just eight, with the new value of 1965:
0.0095 taking up the place of the former values
for 1960 and 1970.
Lines 1 and 10 ensure that this process is repeated
until only one data point is left. That is, on the
second iteration, VNC again compares all values of
successive pairs of time periods to each other, merges
the two most similar time periods, etc.3 The left
panel in Fig. 2 plots the amalgamation of the time
periods and the distance on the y-axis corresponds
to the sum of variation coefficients, so we see that
1960 and 1970 are indeed merged first at y¼ 0.0744.
Fig. 2 VNC dendrogram for the TIME data on just because (A) with overlaid line plots of observed frequencies and
mean frequencies per cluster and scree plot (B)
Algorithm 1 VNC for the TIME data (in pseudocode)
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 391
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The right panel of Fig. 2 plots the variation coef-
ficients as an analog to scree plots in principal
component analyses, where they are used as a guide-
line to determine how many factors should be
included in a model. Here, the plot indicates how
many different stages should be assumed within a
diachronic development. The plot shows substantial
distances between the three largest clusters, i.e. a
steep slope between the first three points. After the
third cluster, the curve levels off to the right and
becomes nearly horizontal. This suggests a division
into three separate historical stages, each repre-
sented by a cluster. The dendrogram (left panel)
reveals what these clusters are. Cluster 1 ranges
from the 1920s to the 1950s, cluster 2 ranges from
the 1960s to the 1980s, and cluster 3 ranges from the
1990s to 2000s. The dashed horizontal lines indicate
the mean frequencies of just because that are
observed in the data for the three clusters. So,
while these data clearly support the finding from
Kendall’s- that there is an upward trend, this
approach also provides the additional, more fine-
grained information that it is probably most
useful to interpret the trend in the data as involving
three successive stages with mean frequencies of
occurrences of 0.0045, 0.01, and 0.034 for cluster 1,
cluster 2, and cluster 3, respectively. In summary,
both the dendrogram and the scree plot in Fig. 2
strongly suggest that a characterization of the devel-
opment of just because just on the basis of the over-
all trend is insufficient since that would fail to note
that there are in fact three different stages in the
data. Without such an approach, precision and
objectivity of this kind are hard to come by.
Consider now Fig. 3 for analogous representations
of the data for keep V-ing.
Although keep V-ing and just because have simi-
larly high Kendall’s- values, the respective results
of VNC are quite different. The scree plot for keep
V-ing in Fig. 3 shows that, apart from the overall
upward trend that Kendall’s- already identified,
there is hardly any additional structure in the devel-
opment of keep V-ing. There is no early point where
the scree plot levels off, and it levels off only at so late
in the construction of the dendrogram that by that
time most clusters consist of only one time period.
An analysis of the frequency changes found with
keep V-ing thus need not concern itself with any
sub-stages within the overall time frame; reporting
the overall trend is sufficient. Still, this finding can
Fig. 3 VNC dendrogram for the TIME data on keep V-ing (A) with overlaid line plots of observed frequencies and scree
plot (B)
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
392 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
only be obtained through a VNC application that
specifically tests for the existence of sub-stages.
3.3 Iterative sequential interval
estimation using changes between
actual values
In the previous section, we have discussed how
VNC could be used to determine whether there
are sub-structures in the data. VNC is based on
the absolute differences between data points: while
it measures the differences between each data point
and the immediately following one, it does not take
into consideration whether that difference reflects
an increase or decrease in frequency. This is nec-
essarily not only a weakness and does result in
cluster structures that both match intuitions about
the shapes of the curves, but also still provides new
information that would be likely to escape the naked
eye. In this section, we discuss a second heuristic
that also allows the detection of sub-structures in
the data, but that does so in a way that is more
concerned with the entire development that has
led up to a particular point of time.
Just like VNC, this heuristic is an iterative algo-
rithm, called ISIE for iterative sequential interval
estimation. It repeatedly moves through successively
larger sequences of data points to produce continu-
ously updated estimates about how a developmental
or diachronic curve will proceed. To put it simply,
the method gives us a range of expected values for
the next step in the development. If that next step
happens to go beyond the expected values, we have
detected a change that merits further attention.
The procedure is characterized in Algorithm 2.
Again, this algorithm may seem rather opaque
initially, but will become clear once we discuss
an example.
The application of this to the data for just because
and keep V-ing results in Fig. 4.
Let us again move through Algorithm 2 on the
basis of the data for just because. The first seven lines
merely gather the pieces of information that all
following calculations require: on the first iteration
in line 2, ISIE records the difference of the second
value minus the first value and generates a vector d,
which contains the value of 0.004 0.005¼
{0.001}. In line 3, ISIE takes the negative sign
from the one observed difference in d and generates
a vector s {1}. In line 4, ISIE generates the mean of
all absolute differences in d, which is of course just
0.001. In line 5, ISIE generates a vector p, which is
{1} since there is just one data point yet. In line 6,
ISIE would add up all values of p, where s is positive,
but since there are none sumþ becomes 0. In line 7,
ISIE adds up all values of p, where s is negative so
sum becomes 1.
With these pieces of information in place, the
algorithm can proceed to make upper and lower
estimates for the next step in the development.
Algorithm 2 ISIE for the TIME data (in pseudocode)
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 393
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
In line 8, ISIE estimates an upper limit for the value
of the third frequency of just because: it takes the
value of the second frequency and adds to it the
percentage sumþ of a. Since this is zero that
means that ISIE ‘thinks’ ‘Since I have not observed
a single increase of frequencies yet, I have no reason
to expect an increase now: I therefore guess conser-
vatively that the probable upper limit of the next
frequency is the current value’.
In line 9, ISIE estimates a corresponding lower
limit for the third frequency value of just because
by taking the value of the second frequency and
subtracting the percentage sum of a. Since the per-
centage is 1, that means that ISIE ‘thinks’ ‘Since I
have only observed a single decrease of frequencies
so far, I can only assume that this development will
continue: I therefore guess conservatively that the
probable lower limit of the next frequency is the
current value minus the last difference I witnessed’.
From the upper and lower estimates, ISIE projects
a range of expected values, which is shown in Fig. 4
as a gray triangle.
The interesting part comes now. As ISIE goes
through additional iterations, the sum of all pre-
vious developments cumulatively shapes its expec-
tations about future developments. Bear with us
and consider the second iteration in detail: ISIE
proceeds to the next frequency, 0.005 again.
On this iteration, the vector of differences d it
generates in line 2 becomes {0.001, 0.001},
namely 0.004 0.005 (from above) and
0.005 0.004 (the current step). The vector s corre-
spondingly becomes {1, 1} in line 3. The average
of the absolute differences a remains {0.001} in line
4. In line 5, the vector of percentages becomes
{0.333, 0.667} because the numbers from 1 to n
(and we are looking at the second difference) get
divided by the sum of the numbers from 1 to n.
Thus, 1 and 2 get both divided by 3. In line 6,
ISIE adds up all values of p, where s is positive,
sumþ becomes 0.667. In line 7, ISIE adds up all
values of p, where s is negative so sum becomes
0.333.
On the basis of these values, ISIE estimates an
expected range for the fourth corpus period. In line
8, ISIE estimates an upper limit for the fourth
frequency value of just because as follows: it takes
the value of the third frequency (0.005) and adds
to it the percentage sumþ of a (0.667 0.001¼
0.000667). In line 9, ISIE estimates a corresponding
lower limit by taking the value of the third fre-
quency (0.005) and subtracting from it the percen-
tage sum of a (0.333 0.001¼ 0.000333). Both
these lines and the triangle are drawn, so ISIE
guesses that the next value should be between
0.005667 and 0.004667. The actual observed
Fig. 4 Results of ISIE for just because and keep V-ing
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
394 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
frequency lies just outside this range, as the next
value is 0.004 again. In this fashion, ISIE proceeds
until the triangle for the ninth value has been
computed and drawn.
What is the motivation for this seemingly com-
plex approach? First, it may be considered as an
attractive complement to VNC because while the
latter also provides interesting groupings of the
data, these groupings are not based on all accumu-
lated differences over time. Second, ISIE uses the
mean of the absolute differences until point of
time x as the overall maximal range for how the
value at point of time xþ 1 may vary; thus, small
ranges of variation will be predicted for curves that
have not exhibited much variation in the past,
which is exactly what one would want (cf. the first
three prediction triangles in the left panel of Fig. 4).
Third, and maybe most importantly, VNC does not
take into consideration recency effects of the shape
of the curve let alone weight those differentially, but
ISIE does. Recall that when we looked at the third
frequency, ISIE ‘knew’ that it was facing an uncer-
tainty of 0.001 in the prediction of the next figure
(the mean of all previous differences, a conservative
estimate of the variation to expect). But then, ISIE
also ‘knew’ that the last change it saw was an
increase (from 0.004 to 0.005). Thus, while it is
back at the value of the first frequency—0.005—it
now recognizes an upward trend. Therefore, the
uncertainty of 0.001 is not split equally between
‘the next value will be larger’ and ‘the next value
will be smaller’, but since the most recent change
has been an increase, that gets weighted more
strongly and the triangle covers more values larger
than the current one.
But what do the results actually show for just
because? First, we obtain further support for the
VNC analysis. The first four values make a very
reasonable candidate for one group not only just
in the VNC approach but also here, because
the observed values at the beginning of the curve
(where ISIE still has little information about how
the data look like) are close to the predicted values
(the dashed lines) and the predicted intervals (the
gray triangles). The first major deviation arises
after the fourth frequency, exactly where VNC
also suggested a different cluster. The fifth and the
sixth frequency form a group in VNC and also here
since their observed frequencies are again close to
the predicted values and within the gray intervals.
The eighth and the ninth frequency are set apart
from the rest because their observed frequencies
are completely at odds with everything the algorithm
could learn from the previous data and far away
from the predicted values.
Second, we also get a more general feel for the
predictability of the diachronic data. The data for
just because are relatively well behaved and, within
the clusters and with the exception of the last two,
close to the predicted values, but the data for keep
V-ing in the right panel show a rather different
picture: not a single step from one frequency to
another can be predicted well from what is known
from the previous development. In other words,
there is an overall trend but within that overall
trend there are rather erratic deviations from what
one would predict.
3.4 Interrupted trends
So far, we have concerned ourselves with the dia-
chronic TIME corpus. However, as mentioned in
the introduction, temporally ordered data are also
available when looking at language acquisition cor-
pora. One big difference is that because of the com-
plex nature of language acquisition itself, the
interactive spoken nature of the data, and the intri-
cacies of collection of data in that discipline, such
corpora are often not only more fine-grained but
also even more variable than diachronic corpora.
This is true both on the coarser level of larger
trends as well as on the finer level of individual
recordings. As to the former, the occurrence of
utterances that are repeated several times skews
frequency counts of constructions and lexical
items, and the vagaries of individual recordings
have a larger influence on local patterns: in a session
where caretakers read to their children, the child
may say less than in a session where caretakers ask
a lot of questions. As to the latter, phenomena, such
as U-shaped developmental patterns substantially
complicate the interpretation of observed trends as
do sudden turning points arising from the child
having mastered a particular rule and suddenly
changing the way in which a particular construction
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 395
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
is used across the board. Some of the methods out-
lined above are therefore less well applicable to such
data even though the general questions one wishes
to investigate with the data may of course be the
same.
As an example and, at the same time, a word of
caution, we discuss a case study first undertaken in
Stoll and Gries (manuscript under revision) con-
cerning the acquisition of tense and aspect in
Russian. Using the rather comprehensive and fine-
grained Stoll corpus of Russian language acquisi-
tion, Stoll and Gries study how children gradually
learn to break up the initially strong correlation
between imperfective aspect and present tense on
the one hand and perfective aspect and past tense
on the other hand. The strength of association
between the two tenses and aspects is measured
using Cramer’s V, a measure of effect size based
on chi-square values. The data they obtain for one
child are represented in Fig. 5, where the x-axis
and the y-axis represent the temporal dimension
and the strength of the tense-aspect association.
In order to determine whether there is a trend
in the data, researchers could now proceed as out-
lined in Section 3.1 and compute a correlation coef-
ficient. Contrary to our suggestion above, many
scholars use a linear regression with a Pearson pro-
duct-moment correlation. This is problematic, first,
because the data violate the assumptions made by
linear regressions, but even more importantly
because the relation in the data need not be linear.
In the present case, the data are very noisy and
variable (which is why ISIE would fail here), but
there is a significant correlation indicated in the
graph (with a regression line and its confidence
interval). However, a nonparametric smoother of
the kind exemplified in Fig. 1 suggests that there
are actually two trends here, not one as the simple
linear regression would have us believe.
Stoll and Gries, therefore, apply an extension of
regular linear regressions, regression with break-
points. They iteratively split up the data at every
individual recording into an early part and a late
part and then compute linear regressions in which
the dependent variable is the vector of Cramer’s
V values of the child and the independent variables
are the interactions between the age and an indi-
cator variable that marks each age as being part
of the early or the late part (cf. Baayen, 2008,
Section 6.4; Crawley, 2002, ch 22 for details about
this approach). For each of these regressions,
they stored the model deviance and then chose the
Fig. 5 Development of the coupling of tense and aspect for one Russian child
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
396 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
model whose breakpoint was smallest and after
which only increasing deviances were found. The
two regressions following from this—one before
the breakpoint, one after it—are shown in Fig. 6.
Model comparison shows that the breakpoint at
this location is highly warranted: if the amount of
variance the linear model with the breakpoint
explains (R2¼ 0.266) is compared to that of
the linear model without the breakpoint from
above, it emerges that the regression with a break-
point can explain significantly more variance:
F(1, 77)¼ 11.991; P < 0.001. In addition, the result
nearly perfectly replicates the results of the
smoother: from shortly before age 2 until approxi-
mately age 3, there is a strong downward trend
during which the child learns to relax the coupling
of tense and aspect (note the correlation coefficient,
which is much smaller than the one obtained for all
of the data). As of age 3, on the other hand, there is
no more development and the slope of the second
regression line of the child does not differ signifi-
cantly from 0 anymore: no more learning with
regard to the tense-aspect patterning takes place.
Thus, the regression with breakpoints reveals a
bifurcation of the developmental data that simple
linear summary statistics and premature groupings
of the data may well have missed.
4 Discussion, Concluding
Remarks, and an Outlook
Frequency developments in temporally ordered cor-
pora often present the analyst with ambiguous,
unclear, or otherwise messy data. Interpreting such
data on subjective grounds alone can be very pro-
blematic and may lead to incongruous conclusions.
In this article, we have proposed several analytical
strategies that work in a bottom-up fashion, thus
allowing the data to speak for itself in a manner
that may inform and guide further analysis.
In particular, we have suggested tools that
address the questions whether or not the observed
data reflect a genuine trend (Section 3.1) and how
developments can be further partitioned to arrive at
a more fine-grained understanding of the processes
that have taken place. Among the analytic needs that
we have addressed are the distinction of separate
stages in the development of linguistic forms, even
in the absence of a single linear trend (Section 3.2),
the automatic detection of ‘surprising’ developmen-
tal breaks, given a preceding series of data points
(Section 3.3), and the modeling of developments
that include several linear trends that differ from
one another (Section 3.4). We take it for granted
Fig. 6 Development of the coupling of tense and aspect for one Russian child 2
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 397
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
that researchers in the areas of historical linguistics
and language acquisition have concerned themselves
with these issues all along; our intent was to make
the questions explicit and to suggest practical steps
toward their solution. The tools that we have sug-
gested in this article can not only serve to make
assessments of trends more intersubjectively reliable,
but we also hope to have shown that methods such
as VNC and ISIE reveal aspects of linguistic changes
that would not have been noticed otherwise. The
potential to make previously undetected phenom-
ena available for further analysis and, ultimately,
linguistic theory building, in our view more than
justifies the extra effort that comes with the applica-
tion of these techniques.
We would like to conclude this article with an
outlook to another type of investigation that would
merit future attention. In this article, we have
restricted our discussion to simple frequency
counts that measure how often one or more given
forms occur over a number of historical periods.
Naturally, much historical research aims to go far
beyond this. With regard to English, there is now
a growing field of corpus-based historical sociolin-
guistics (Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg, 1996,
2003; Reppen et al., 2002) investigating the role
of parameters such as gender, dialect, and genre in
grammatical change. Reference to these factors can
make a historical analysis not only more detailed,
but can also go a long way toward explaining why
a given change happened the way it did. Since
these parameters are annotated in at least some
of the available diachronic corpora, these can be
integrated as explanatory factors in quantitative
historical studies.
To take an illustrating case, Nevalainen (2000)
studies the generalization of the English third-
person singular present indicative suffix -(e)s, i.e.
the gradual replacement of forms like he hath with
he has. Drawing on the Corpus of Early English
Correspondence, she analyzes this development not
only in terms of the relative frequencies of both
forms, but also in terms of regional and gendered
variation, hoping to learn whether there was a partic-
ular region that initiated the change, whether one
of the genders was leading the change, and how
these factors interacted. Nevalainen subjects each
corpus period of her data to a Varbrul analysis,
determining for each one whether factors of region
and gender can be used to predict usage of -(e)s
instead of -(e)th.
Nevalainen’s (2000) use of corpus data and her
approach in general represents exactly the kind of
study that could take advantage of our suggestions.
Even though Nevalainen goes well beyond a simple
reporting of frequencies, we see several ways in
which the techniques suggested in this article
could be applied to meet her analytical needs.
First, there is the issue of how the corpus data are
partitioned into periods. In Nevalainen’s Fig. 1 and
Appendix A, the data are grouped into several
20-year periods; in her Table 2 and Appendix B,
there are several 40-year periods; and in Appendix
C and D, there are 30-year periods representing
different time slices of the corpus data with inter-
vening intervals. A VNC approach might have been
useful here to determine which groupings of the data
are actually those that are supported most strongly
by the data. In order to make a contrasting Varbrul
analysis most revealing, we would recommend that
the groupings entered as input were not arbitrarily
chosen periods of time but instead periods of time
that have been identified as different from each other
by a data-driven, bottom-up procedure.
Second, the analysis is not as multidimen-
sional as it could be. True, Nevalainen investigates
several variables, PERIOD (not defined via a VNC),
GENDER, and REGION, but as far as we can see, her
analyses just involve one variable alone for each
period separately (cf. her discussion on p. 48f.).
A truly multifactorial approach would have used
a different strategy, however. Instead of doing sev-
eral different monofactorial approaches, one could
use a binary logistic regression in which the depen-
dent variable is THIRDPERSON (-s versus -th), and
the independent variables are PERIOD (ordered),
GENDER, and REGION, and all the interactions invol-
ving PERIOD:
 PERIOD and GENDER: Do the frequencies of the
suffixes in question change differently over time
for men and women?
 PERIOD and REGION: Do the frequencies of the
suffixes in question change differently over time
in the regions?
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
398 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 PERIOD and GENDER and REGION: Do the frequencies
of the suffixes in question change differently over
time for the genders in the regions?
These are questions that Nevalainen’s analysis
does not answer, but that would be very reward-
ing to investigate. To illustrate this point a little
further, let us consider a study that does report an
interaction between the passage of time and other
variables: Biber and Burges (2000) investigate the
historical development of gender differences in
dramatic dialogue. Their study is based on the
ARCHER corpus, which they group into four peri-
ods (1650–99, 1700–99, 1800–99, and 1900–90).
Each conversational turn in these texts is coded for
four variables: What we can think of as the depen-
dent variable of their study is the INVOLVEDNESS of
the dramatic dialogue, which is operationalized
in terms of several linguistic features that signal
involved versus informational discourse (Biber,
1988). Overall, this coding produces a numerical
score for each turn. The independent variables
are PERIOD, SPEAKER’S GENDER, and ADDRESSEE’S GENDER.
Fig. 7 summarizes the developments.
Biber and Burges observe that the sampled dia-
logue becomes more involved in both genders, but
especially in female speakers. Interestingly, there is
an interaction of PERIOD and the other variables.
In the 17th century, ADDRESSEE’S GENDER shows a
strong effect. Speech directed to females is more
involved than speech directed to males, which
tends to show characteristics of informational dis-
course. However, this effect wanes as time pro-
gresses. In the 20th century, the more accurate
predictor of involved discourse is actually a combi-
nation of the two gender variables, namely the
distinction between cross-gender and same-gender
dialogues. Dialogues between the genders have
become more involved, whereas this development
has been comparatively weaker for dialogues for
speakers of the same gender. Fig. 7 captures this
interaction graphically: in the first period, the data
points representing speech directed to females and
the data points representing speech directed to
males pattern together, respectively; in the final
period, cross-gender speech and same-gender
speech pattern together.
What now can our approach offer in this partic-
ular scenario? Some of the issues raised above in
connection with Nevalainen’s study apply here as
well. VNC could be used to determine initially
how the four centuries naturally partition with
regard to the dependent variable of involvedness.
Further, Biber and Burges do not show statistically
that their conclusions from Fig. 7 can be drawn with
a high degree of confidence. A multifactorial design
Fig. 7 Involvedness for female/male speakers/hearers (Biber and Burges, 2000, p. 31)
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 399
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
along the lines mentioned above could make more
precise which factors are significant predictors of
involvedness in a given historical period and
whether that predictive power changes measurably
from one period to the next. In work in progress,
we are currently exploring such issues in more
detail.
References
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing Linguistic Data. A
Practical Introduction to Statistics Using R. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Beal, J., Corrigan, K., and Moisl, H. (eds) (2007).
Creating and Digitizing Language Corpora: Diachronic
Databases. Houndmills: Palgrave.
Biber, D. (1988). Variation Across Speech and Writing.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D. and Burges, J. (2000). Historical change in the
language use of women and men. Gender differences in
dramatic dialogue. Journal of English Linguistics, 28(1):
21–37.
Crawley, M. J. (2002). Statistical Computing: An
Introduction to Data Analysis using S-Plus. Chichester:
John Wiley and Sons.
Gries, St. Th. and Hilpert, M. (2008). The identification
of stages in diachronic data: variability-based neighbor
clustering. Corpora, 1: 59–81.
Gries, St. Th. and Stoll, S. (forthcoming). Finding devel-
opmental groups in acquisition data: variability-based
neighbor clustering. Journal of Quantitative Linguistics.
Hilpert, M. (2006). Distinctive collexeme analysis and
diachrony. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory,
2(2): 243–57.
Hinneburg, A., Mannila, H., Kaislaniemi, S.,
Nevalainen, T., and Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (2007).
How to handle small samples: bootstrap and Bayesian
methods in the analysis of linguistic change. Literary
and Linguistic Computing, 22: 137–50.
Kohnen, T. (2006). Historical corpus linguistics: perspec-
tives on English diachronic corpora. Anglistik, 17(2):
73–91.
Kohnen, T. (2007). Connective Profiles in the History of
English Texts: Aspects of Orality and Literacy. In
Lenker, U. and Meurman-Solin, A. (eds), Clausal
Connection in the History of English. Amsterdam:
Benjamins, pp. 289–308.
Leech, G. and Smith, N. (2006). Recent Grammatical
Change in Written English 1961–1992: Some
Preliminary Findings of a Comparison of American
with British English. In Renouf, A. and Kehoe, A.
(eds), The Changing Face of Corpus Linguistics.
Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi.
Lenker, U. and Meurman-Solin, A. (eds) (2007).
Connectives in the History of English. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Lindquist, H. and Mair, C. (eds) (2004). Corpus
approaches to grammaticalization in English.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES Project: Tools for
Analyzing Talk, vol. 2: The Database, 3rd edn. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mair, C. (2000). Twentieth-Century English: History,
Variation and Standardization. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Nevalainen, T. (2000). Gender differences in the evolu-
tion of standard English. Evidence from the corpus of
early English correspondence. Journal of English
Linguistics, 28(1): 38–59.
Nevalainen, T. and Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (eds)
(1996). Sociolinguistics and Language History. Studies
based on the Corpus of Early English Correspondence.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Nevalainen, T. and Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (2003).
Historical Socio-linguistics: Language Change in Tudor
and Stuart England. London: Pearson Education.
Reppen, R., Fitzmaurice, S., and Biber, D. (eds) (2002).
Using Corpora to Explore Linguistic Variation.
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Stoll, S and Gries, St. Th. (in preparation). An associa-
tion strength approach to characterizing development
in corpora.
Notes
1 Strictly speaking, most linguistic corpora consist
of texts that vary along the parameter of time. Even
a corpus such as the BNC, which has been designed
to represent a synchronic snapshot of British English,
contains texts from different decades. Synchronic
analyses abstract away from these time differences.
In the end, what makes a corpus a diachronic corpus
is its use for comparisons over time.
2 The P-values in Table 3 are exact P-values computed on
the basis of an exhaustive permutation of all data
M. Hilpert and St. Th. Gries
400 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
points; they differ slightly from what most standard
statistics software would output.
3 A technical note: when VNC compares data points
that arose from the merging from previous data
points [as when the new data point 1965: 0.0095 is
compared to the previous time period (1950) and
the subsequent time period (1980), then it uses the
original data points to make sure that the diversity of
the data points that gave rise to the new mean is
adequately reflected].
Assessing frequency changes
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 401
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
