
1 Introduction
The Henry III Fine Rolls project is a collaborative
project between the National Archives in the UK,
the departments of History and the Centre for
Computing in the Humanities at King’s College
London, and the department of History and
American Studies at Canterbury Christ Church
University. Its aim is to produce a digital and
print edition of the Fine Rolls from the reign
of the 13th century English King Henry III
(1216–72).
The Fine Rolls1 recorded agreements made with
the king to pay a certain sum of money for specified
benefits. They date back at least to the 1170s and
therefore are the earliest witnesses of the series of
rolls on which the English royal Chancery recorded
its business. The fines represent a unique resource
for historians to study politics, government and
society, particularly in the case of those recorded
during the reign of Henry III, a period which saw
major changes in English political life and the par-
liamentary state.
Similarly to the Fine Rolls that preceded them,
the Henrician fine rolls2 are written in Latin on
membranes of parchment in Chancery cursive
hands, but were never properly published before
the Henry III Fine Rolls project took the initiative
to do so. Indeed, at the core of the project outcome
is an edition of the translated summaries of the fine
rolls encoded in TEI XML, complemented by an
overarching RDF/OWL conceptual model, and digi-
tal facsimiles.3 The edition takes two published
forms: the first, a full-featured website which
includes browsing, search and display features; and
the second, a set of printed volumes that include
apparatus traditionally associated with this specific
type of publication: preliminary materials in the
Correspondence:
Arianna Ciula, Centre for
Computing in the
Humanities, King’s College
London, 2nd Floor, 26–29
Drury Lane, London WC2B
5RL, UK.
E-mail:
arianna.ciula@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
129
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp007
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
form of essays and editorial guidelines, the core text,
and topical indexes. Figure 1 illustrates the process
by which digital primitives are processed into the
two publication streams.
In this article, we contextualize the ontological
complexities of a dual publication within various
theoretical frameworks. Our aim is to take inspira-
tion from these theories—from material culture,
media and social theory to bibliography, archival
and literary editing—and connect them to the
experience of producing two objects of different
materiality but of very close scope. We will also
explain how these reflections about multimodal
publication have been used to design a study for
evaluating the use of this edition.
2 Text-based Archival Research
and Editing
Who forms what Nunberg calls the ‘community of
readers’ (Nunberg, 1993) that has created resources
such as the outcome of the Fine Rolls project, and
how might they be expected to use it? Given the
subject matter and the genre, we expect readers to
primarily consist of scholars who perform text-based
archival research with documentary primary sources
that date back to the late Middle Ages.
The research activities of medieval historians (or
more generally humanities scholars concerned with
the medieval period) primarily involve the reading
Fig. 1 Chart that exemplifies the publication process of the Fine Rolls in print and on the web
A. Ciula and T. Lopez
130 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of primary sources and/or their editions with the
aim of fostering new interpretations of those records
or making new editions. Indeed, medievalists are
almost obsessed with the editing of charters, rolls
and records of any kind. As an anonymous reviewer
of an historical project bid submitted to the AHRC
in November 2007 puts it:
[. . .] the medievalists work with such frag-
mentary sources, and so much of the medieval
evidence has been lost, that any scraps of
information that can be garnered here have
the potential to transform our understanding
of events, personalities and whole societies.
Though this type of scholarly investigation may
be compared to—and shares common methods
with—any other research activity that creates critical
editions of primary sources with an aim toward
interpreting their context, it also differs in that the
primary editorial focus is on the re-creation of the
fullness and context of documentary records.
Consequently, a first important implication
arises about the centrality of primary sources
within this scholarly community: the primary
sources are strictly connected to the outcome of
the research—the latter is impossible without a
deep knowledge of the former. This is one reason
why the storage and visualization capabilities of the
digital environment are attractive to scholars, as it
enables them to include images of the original docu-
ments in their works. In doing so, this material
enters the undefined and blurred world of digital
resources, where research essays, original records,
reference material and edited texts co-exist without
the canonical order of a print publication. However,
it also represents something closer to a traditional
research environment wherein familiarity with the
material sources is crucial and where boundaries
between different types of evidence are constantly
overlooked and subsumed by the overarching aim
of creating connections.
A second important aspect of this historical edit-
ing praxis is the recognition such publications
garner in the wider community of scholars.
Scholarly editions that hope to offer any significant
glimpse to the past must allow the community of
researchers to continue doing what they have done
for centuries, namely connecting the pieces together.
Commenting on the importance of the Fine Rolls to
the historical discipline, the editors note that:
[The Rolls] are crucial to the study of family
structures and patronage networks at the
highest levels and, thus, to the political history
of England. As importantly, they reveal devel-
opments in the common law and the broad-
ening of access to justice through the purchase
of an expanding number of writs to transact
law cases, changes to the seigniorial and
money economy through farming of demesne
land and the growth of markets and fairs, and
the role of women, particularly widows, in
society. (Dryburgh, Hartland, Ciula, and
Lopez, 2008, (A) Brief overview of source
and project)
While discussing the ‘long shelf-life of printed
scholarly editions’ within the context of literary stu-
dies, Sutherland (2008) claims that ‘the scholarly
edition of a literary work is expected to have a far
longer life than any other critical study or opinion’.
Similarly, the sense one has in examining the con-
text and history of text-based archival editing is that
it results in key publications that will affect the
research practice of scholars for generations
to come.
Therefore, along with the materiality of the pri-
mary sources, the materiality of their scholarly edi-
tions about these sources is central to the research
process we are examining. In studies of material
culture generally and, in particular, in studies of
the material book, the presentational format of
text is considered to be of fundamental importance
for the study of production, social reading and use.
Therefore, description of and speculation about the
physical organization of the text is essential for
understanding the meaning of the artefact that
bears that text. Similarly, in the digital humanities,
the presentation of a text is considered to be an
integral outgrowth of the data modelling process:
a representation of the text but also to some
degree an actualization of the interpretative state-
ments about the text. Indeed, to the eyes of a
reader, the presentational features of both a printed
book and a digital textual object will not only reveal
Reflecting on a dual publication
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 131
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the assumptions and beliefs of its creators, but affect
future perception and analysis of the work. This is
possibly more evident for the print tradition than it
is for the digital. As the editors of the Fine Rolls
project have commented:
For almost two centuries historians have [. . .]
relied upon a two-volume set of extracts
printed in record type, the editor of which,
concentrating on material of strictly genealo-
gical interest, omitted around 80-85% of the
entries and produced scant, unreliable
indexes, with the result that the rolls have
long been under-utilised. (Dryburgh et al.,
2008, (A) Brief overview of source and
project)
3 Henry III Fine Rolls Project as
Dual-medium Research Collection
The Fine Rolls project borrows equally from both
the print tradition of reference publications for
archive-based study and the emerging practices of
design of digital collections without definite genre
and material boundaries. Often conceptualized as a
digital or hypertextual edition (Faulhaber, 1991),
this kind of digital work may also be thought of as
a ‘thematic research collection’ (Fig. 2), a dynamic
aggregation of primary, secondary, and tertiary
materials that supports research on a theme, inter-
preted broadly to mean an ‘event, place, phenom-
enon, or any other object of study’ (Unsworth,
2000; Palmer, 2004, 2005).
The print genre to which the Fine Rolls of Henry
III publication most closely adheres is the calendar.
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, a
calendar lists or registers ‘documents arranged
chronologically with a short summary of the con-
tents of each, so as to serve as an index to the docu-
ments of a given period’ (OED). Calendars are also
an example of what Palmer has called ‘access
resources’ (Palmer, 2005, pp. 1140–1141): ‘refer-
ences to formally published or physically collected
information’.
As demonstrated in the Fine Rolls, access
resources need not be professionally produced by
indexers, but may be created by scholars themselves,
thereby becoming crucial intermediaries to the writ-
ten record. These works are socially shaped, repre-
senting the judgement and expertise of their creators
and embodying the values of the disciplines that
produce them. When they take a digital form,
these scholarly created resources often fall into the
category of the previously described thematic
research collections, embedding scholarship ‘in the
product and its use’:
The digital archives, data repositories, colla-
boratories, and other Internet-based resources
being produced by scholars are often direct
corollaries to their programs of research and
reflect the information needs of their creators.
They tend to be tailored to the specific cul-
tures of research communities, rather than
adhering to existing blueprints for access
resources. (Palmer, 2005, p. 1142)
It follows that the Fine Rolls is a hybrid, an inter-
section between the ‘new’ genres of digital scholar-
ship and the established ones. (Such hybridity is
precisely the kind of thing that interests us digital
humanists!). But the Fine Rolls is also a hybrid in
another very material sense, for at the same time
that the edition has been developed for online pub-
lication, its core materials have also been gathered
and formatted into print volumes. It exists in print
and digital mode, embodying an instance in which
the new medium, as Lucius says, ‘does not super-
sede the old one, like the wireless did not replace the
concert hall and television did not replace the
cinema, but joins the old medium in an often posi-
tive and invigorating interaction’ (Lucius, 2008).
Consequently, for the purposes of this analysis,
we must expand the operational definition of the-
matic research collections to include those that span
media, in our case appearing in both printed and
digital form. As a scholarly produced access
resource, we must also consider how the compo-
nents of the Fine Rolls shape each other when repre-
sented in different media, and how the social
process that developed the printed genre is digitally
manifest. Since materiality and therefore text mean
different things in different media, we ask: to what
extent does the ‘theme’ of the Fine Rolls as embo-
died in a hybrid materiality maintain an identity
A. Ciula and T. Lopez
132 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
across media? What are the measurable losses and
gains of qualities (Kichuk, 2007) unique to each
medium?
4 Evaluating the Fine Rolls:
Material Aspects and Reader
Study
We believe that further research into the usage of
these parallel publications will lead to a better
understanding of scholarly needs, particularly
those that draw from a strong tradition of docu-
mentary editing. Indeed, as the previous discussion
has shown, these two publications are not necessa-
rily perceived or, perhaps more importantly, used as
separate resources with rigid boundaries between
them. For a scholar interested in the historical
record, the reading of the Fine Rolls edition and
the seeking of information related to it is a compre-
hensive process that does not stop when the book is
closed or the browser shut. Indeed, we believe that
connections between the two modes of publication
will be sought in a fluid manner. Thus in the follow-
ing sections of the article, we refer to literature
investigating the range of information activities
involved in performing humanities research with
print and digital resources, so as to establish an
analytical framework for evaluating the Fine Rolls.
Information-seeking research has produced a
number of studies that examine behaviours of par-
ticular groups of researchers using traditional and
digital methods and sources.4 Our methodological
approach is thus guided by the literature and data
collection methods established in this body of
research.5 As with these studies, we are not striving
to achieve statistical significance but rather to
Fig. 2 Mix of content and format—as extracted from the print and the web—that characterizes the Fine Rolls as
thematic research collection
Reflecting on a dual publication
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 133
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
develop a nuanced picture of the work performed by
scholars using this and like material. The decision to
use qualitative methods has forced us to limit the
number of participants to a small sample, drawn
from members of the Fine Rolls research team
who have written materials using the edition, but
also on a small sample of researchers from the wider
scholarly community who perform text-based archi-
val research with documentary primary sources that
date back to the late Middle Ages.
Our research plan is structured in three phases:
(1) Phase 1: defining the research context;
(2) Phase 2: evidence for modes of access and bridge
building;
(3) Phase 3: usability testing and implications for
design.
To-date, we have completed some aspects of
Phase 1, in which we establish the context for
work done using historical sources like the Fine
Rolls. We have based our data collection methods
for this phase of work, which include a combination
of document analysis, questionnaire and interview-
ing on the following research questions, adapted
from Brockman et al. (2001):
(1) How do medieval archival researchers think
about, organize and perform their research?
(2) How are information sources used throughout
the research process?
(3) How does access to electronic information
sources affect work practice?
(4) What functions and characteristics make one
(primary, secondary, tertiary) resource better
than another?
(5) How can the traditional role of printed sources
be reconciled with the use of virtual unlocated
resources that may provide access to other
pieces of a single Thematic Research Collection?
From the process of identifying lines of inquiry,
articulating methods followed in answering these
questions, developing profiles of the researchers
who perform the work, we expect to gain deeper
insights into the evolution of the interpretative
threads within a research process answering how
different types of evidence are connected, and how
the analysis of sources and argument develop
through the process and within the finished
product.
4.1 Analysis: fluid paths and the
bridges that connect them
Coupled with this period of data collection is the
selection of information seeking theories and frame-
works that we can use to understand how the profile
of our researchers compares with a more general
profile of humanities scholars. For this analysis, we
turn to Palmer’s research into the ways humanities
scholars use digital information sources.
Fundamentally, this work demonstrates that use of
thematic collections fits into the ‘centrifugal search-
ing’ and collecting mode of digital information
access (Palmer, 2005, p. 1147). Much like the obser-
vations made earlier about medieval historians’
work with sources, Palmer has found that research
in the digital environment follows an interpretive
course, starting from a set of core materials, and
then proceeding outward in long, fluid paths.
Reading and writing are the outcomes of deep
inquiry over months or even years around this set
of core materials. Other core research activities per-
formed using digital sources include confirmation
and discovery searching (to confirm ideas or form
new ones), collecting materials (for future or re-
use), and consultation and communication with
other scholars.
A second aspect of our analysis draws from
Brenda Dervin’s Sense-Making Theory (1992,
1998), a framework that broadly speaks to aspects
of the ‘nature of information’ and communication,
and in practice is often used to learn ‘what users
want from systems, what they get, and what they
think about them’ (1992, Underlying Assumptions
and theoretic foundations, paragraph 2. and
Introduction, paragraph 1). Dervin has applied the
framework to a number of fields including knowl-
edge management to examine the ‘sense made at
particular points in time-space’ by an individual.
Like Palmer’s humanities scholars who wend again
and again through sources as they pursue lines of
inquiry, Dervin’s theory assumes that humans move
in a ‘world of gaps’ as their reality changes and their
understanding of the world and its meaning is made
and unmade. So conceived, knowledge becomes an
A. Ciula and T. Lopez
134 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
activity, ‘made at the juncture between self and cul-
ture, society, organization’ (Dervin, 1998, p. 36). In
later work, Wilson situated Dervin’s approach
within a larger review of models of information
behaviour, re-conceptualizing the model to de-
emphasize the iterative nature of sense-making
while focusing more directly on the bridging activity
(Wilson, 1999; Fig. 3).
In evaluating the Fine Rolls, we have taken an
orientation toward the sense making approach
that draws on aspects of its metaphor and its
method. Like Wilson, we also place metaphorical
emphasis on the bridging activity, analogous to
the research activities of confirming and discovering
identified by Palmer. Methodologically we focus on
uncovering the tactics of bridging by individuals, in
our case readers of different mediums and materials
that comprise the Fine Rolls, to understand the
nature of the bridges themselves, particularly as
they are materialized within the informational fea-
tures of the print and digital components of the Fine
Rolls project.
To identify these features, we look once more to
Palmer’s examination of the research patterns of
humanities scholars, in which she finds that ‘con-
nective structures’, either ‘embedded in’ or accom-
panying the access resources defined earlier are a key
way in which scholars navigate the terrain of scho-
larly communication. Palmer defines connective gen-
erally as structures used to document relationships
within research literature. These structures, exam-
ples of which include ‘see’ and ‘see also’ notes,
link related information, forming intellectual rela-
tionships between concepts within an access
resource. She notes that within the humanities,
‘research library catalogs, bibliographies, and archi-
val finding aids have been the main tools for mana-
ging access to extensive subject collections of
primary materials and secondary book sources’
(Palmer, 2005, p. 1141). The connective structures
we are examining similarly include the topical
indexes and the search engine, but also other
features of the texts as they co-exist between
media, discussed in more detail in the following
section.
4.2 Discussion: (Dis) connective
structures in the Fine Rolls
In many respects, the artefacts comprising each
medium of the Fine Rolls edition have a lot in
common, either because the digital medium had
to mirror the tradition of its more authoritative
predecessor, or for more practical but hardly insig-
nificant reasons of workflow and foreseen usage.
Furthermore, there are some areas in which the
two media are converging and an effort is being
made to create connective structures that will help
readers use the edition as a whole. This can be seen
by examining the adopted layout for footnotes. The
print format was modelled on the basis of the digital
layout and, although a completely unusual arrange-
ment for this type of publication, was accepted as
suitable by the publisher. Both in print and on the
web, footnotes are placed at the end of each entry
rather than at the foot of every page allowing for
a common and convenient method of citation
between print and web publication (Fig. 4).
Fig. 3 Dervin’s iterative sense making approach (Wilson, 1999) and Dervin’s sense-making approach as modified by
Wilson (1999)
Reflecting on a dual publication
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 135
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
More often however, the demands of the editing
and publishing workflows as well as the inherent
differences in the forms of the two media have
initiated interdependent cycles in the evolution of
the two modes of publication (Fig. 5).
The separation into volumes, for example, pre-
scribes clear limits to the printed text that do not
exist on the web. The physical volumes preclude any
dynamic open-ended vision of the editorial process,
while at the same time providing a sense of stability,
enclosure, and completeness for both editors and
readers. In more practical terms, the sequential pro-
duction of volumes poses various challenges both
from the editorial and the technical point of view
(when it is possible to separate the two). The fact
that the overall print edition is split into meaningful
chunks has, for instance, the effect of introducing
print-only thematic overtones.6 In addition, the edi-
torial coherence between volumes has to be main-
tained, so as to provide for the use of the edition
across volumes. Indeed, modifications in style and
editorial strategies have to be justified and made
sustainable to the extreme that changes applied to
the next volume cannot afford to make the previous
volume unusable.7
Similarly, information architectural choices
taken on the web diverge from the print: material
from all rolls is treated as a single unit, with the
indexes and search engine operating on the entire
corpus; the web calendar is linked to the digital
images and therefore provides a direct connection
to the primary sources. Although the table of con-
tents in the volumes and navigation menus on the
web may seem to respond to the same basic func-
tionality, the primary function of the former is to
‘imprint’ a hierarchical organization on the books
and suggest a path through them. In contrast, the
website is designed with the knowledge that a read-
er’s first glimpse of the edition may be via an exter-
nal search engine like Google, and therefore the
design works to orient the user quickly and establish
meaning both with the current page, and in refer-
ence to content that can be found in other sections
of the site. Material is referenced via URLs on the
web, rather than by page numbers as in the volumes.
The ‘about’ section on the website takes as its gen-
eral aim the introduction of the project as a whole,
while front matter materials in the print publication
focus on the thematic concerns of individual
volumes, as mentioned above.
Fig. 4 Example of the arrangement of footnotes on the web and on the printed volumes to allow for a common method
of citation
A. Ciula and T. Lopez
136 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
In general, the stratagems for navigation on the
web rely much more on the internal structure of
each roll and membrane. One can, for instance,
browse each roll by monthly date on the web; on
the contrary, text based running heads in the print
facilitate a more ‘visual’ browsing of the volumes,
while more prominence is given to the archival sig-
natures on the web.8 It is interesting to note that the
latter may be related both to the workflow of the
project and to the relevance given to the original
records on the web: images were digitized and
added to the website at a rather early stage thereby
affecting the representation of the core text material.
Hence the signatures of the national archive were
accepted as a stable, recognizable convention by
which to refer to the rolls before the edition brought
about its own system of citation and ways of speak-
ing about the work.
The flexibility of the overarching ontology (Ciula
et al., 2008) allows the texts to be fairly exhaustively
indexed, just as the presentational capabilities of the
digital medium allow for the display and navigation
of indexes that are correspondingly large. By con-
trast, the print edition had to follow the refined
conventions of a well-established scholarly tradition
in publishing editions in general and calendar edi-
tions in particular, both in terms of formatting and,
more importantly for us, in terms of content
selection, creation and modelling. So, though the
indexes within the printed edition are also predeter-
mined axes along which to explore the text, the way
in which they are produced is perceived to be a
nuanced and intuitive aspect of the scholarship.
This fact, coupled with the presentational and eco-
nomic constraints of the printed medium, resulted
in volumes in which indexes arrange and present
information succinctly and with a minimum of con-
ceptual repetition.
In practice this means that not only is it unac-
ceptable for the editors to reproduce in print some
visual markers considered necessary on the web,9
but, perhaps more interestingly, that the indexes
on the web ‘are allowed’ to exploit the connections
between categories to the maximum extent possible
and to mix information that would ‘normally’ per-
tain to a single, short index in a volume. Hence what
would be perceived as needless redundancy in print
(see Fig. 6 as an example) becomes a desirable fea-
ture in the highly hyperlinked web version. In effect,
the relationships made evident on the web through
hyperlinking deconstruct traditional canonical cate-
gorization10 (indexes of persons, place, and subjects,
in this case) by highlighting a less fragmented and
less classifiable historical context (where, for
instance, careers of individuals cannot really be
separated from specific locations and institutions).
Fig. 5 Convergence and divergence between editorial strategies and different material realizations
Reflecting on a dual publication
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 137
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The separation into distinct traditional index cate-
gories revealed itself to be too tight a jacket for the
rich data comprising the edition. The negotiation of
presentational differences therefore became the basis
from which to embark on a critique of some of the
methodologies of this kind of historical research and
to initiate discussion about traditional editorial
practice.
4.3 Emerging themes
Our analyses are in their early stages and much work
remains to be done. However, data collected so far
already suggests that our scholars possess a high
familiarity with primary sources through continu-
ous direct access. In addition, participants tend to
cite a core set of sources over and over again. These
key sources mainly consist of facsimiles, editions or
reference works that give access to a substantial
corpus of primary sources in various forms.
Although primary sources can be unambiguously
defined as ‘materials on a topic upon which subse-
quent interpretations or studies are based’ (Hairston
and Ruszkiewicz, 1996, p. 547), it is not straightfor-
ward to draw the line between original documents
and their synthesis or interpretations, especially in
the case of facsimiles and editions. Quite often
sources are cited without any specification of editors
or other bibliographical details: names of main edi-
tors or authors are cited implicitly to refer to their
main works in the field. When online publications
are cited, citations tend to be unspecific; the URL is
rarely included, or a general website address may be
given rather than the pointer to a specific resource.
In some cases in which multiple reprints or editions
of the same records exist, specific reprints and edi-
tions are mentioned and cited, while in other cases
the interpretation of which edition the citation
refers to is left to the reader. The ambiguity of cita-
tion is even more pronounced when the same
source is published in print and digital form.
In regards to particular use of the Fine Rolls
edition, initial findings suggest three areas for
deeper investigation see (Fig. 7). First of all, the
fact that the edition consists of dual modes of pub-
lication is not explicitly evident in the citation
format; this suggests that is difficult to identify
whether the Fine Rolls being cited are the ones pub-
lished online or in the printed volumes.
Similarly, since materials are continuously being
edited and published, it may be hard to identify
whether the Fine Rolls being cited are those that
have been calendared or the original primary
sources. As the project progresses, more fines are
edited and published, and so the thin boundary
between primary sources and access resources is
even more easily crossed. Furthermore, when ana-
lysing citations to the Fine Rolls publication, links to
the online essays known as the ‘Fine of the Month’
occur, but the URLs are not displayed which may
have implications if the essays are collected and
printed out for later work.
Fig. 6 Example of visual markers and other information that is perceived to be useful on the web indexes, but
redundant or inappropriate on the print ones
A. Ciula and T. Lopez
138 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
5 Conclusion
In this article, we draw from the practical experience
of producing both a print and a digital publication
for the Henry III Fine Rolls project currently in his
second phase to present the challenges of such an
endeavour from the perspective of digital huma-
nities research. To give a context to our analysis,
we borrow from various theoretical frameworks
that span from media and book studies to editing
and social theories.
We reflect on the characteristics of archival text-
based research performed by medievalists and on
what this has in common with other humanities
disciplines, in particular as far as the editing and
reading activities of key publications regards. We
do so both by examining closely the materiality of
the Fine Rolls hybrid edition and by evaluating its
use as a whole thematic research collection that span
across media.
The evaluation study, which is currently in its
first phase, is aimed not only at understanding
better the research profile of medieval historians as
drafted in this article, but, more pragmatically, at
suggesting necessary refinements to model mean-
ingful connections between co-existing resources
in the future.
We believe that thematic resources like the Fine
Rolls calendar are key publications that will affect the
research practice of thirteenth-century scholars for
generations to come, and given this, our responsibil-
ity as digital humanists to support such endeavours is
greater than we have probably recognized so far. With
this study we are working to read the Fine Rolls, both
as it exists in a dual medium edition and by looking
at its ‘inherited forms’ (McCarty, 2004, p. 176).
Digital or print?
CFR,1  1216-34 CFR 1216-17, no. 21 (under the heading ‘From the second 
year’) 
Manuscript or edition? 
C 60/11,12 m. 9 (entry 106) 
Note that this note appears in an 
essay written and published in 2006 
so rather early in the project 
lifecycle. Indeed this same footnote 
was updated (September 2008) by 
the project editor and became ‘CFR, 
1218–19, no. 106’.
CFR 1223-1224 , 39, 77, 401 
In the version published in 2007, 
the hyperlink embedded in this 
note leads to the main calendar 
page, while in the version currently 
published online (September 2008), 
the link goes to the specific edited 
entries.
CFR 1216-17, no. 21 
(under the heading 
‘From the second 
year’) 
This citation links to the 
roll page. In the new 
version of the text 
published in June 2008, 
a direct link to the entry
number has been added. 
Ambiguity of online references
Michael Ray’s Fine of the Month for 
December 2006, The lady is not for 
turning: Margaret de Redvers’ fine not to 
be compelled to marry.
D. A. Carpenter, ‘The battle of Lincoln (20 May 
1217) and William Marshal’s Ransom 
Agreement with Nicholas de Stuteville’, Fine of 
the Month (May 2007) 
Fig. 7 Examples of citations of the Fine Rolls edition
Reflecting on a dual publication
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 139
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr Paul Dryburgh
and Dr Beth Hartland for their support.
References
Bates, M., Wilde, D., and Siegfried, S. (1995). Research
practices of humanities scholars in an online environ-
ment: the Getty online searching project report no. 3.
Library and Information Science Research, 17(1): 5–40.
Bolter, J. D. and Grusin, R. (2000). Remediation:
Understanding New Media. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Brockman, W., Neumann, L., Palmer, C. L., and
Tidline, T. J. (2001). Scholarly work in the humanities
and the evolving information environment. Digital
Library Federation Council on Library and Information
Resources (December 2001), Council on Library and
Information Resources.
Brown, C. (2002). Straddling the humanities and social
sciences: the research process of music scholars. Library
& Information Science Research, 24(1): 73.
Buchanan, C., Cunningham, G., Blandford, A., Rimmer,
J., and Warwick, C. (2005). Information seeking by
humanities scholars. Research and Advanced
Technology for Digital Libraries, 9th European
Conference, ECDL, pp. 18–23.
Ciula, A., Spence, P., and Vieira, J. M. (2008). Expressing
complex associations in medieval historical documents:
the Henry III Fine Rolls project. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 23(3): 311–325.
Dervin, B. (1992). From the mind’s eye of the user: the
sense-making qualitative-quantitative methodology. In
Glazier, J. D. and Powell, R. R. (eds), Qualitative
Research in Information Management. Libraries
Unlimited, pp. 61–84. Pre-print available at: http://
www.ideals.uiuc.edu/html/2142/2281/Dervin1992a.htm.
Dervin, B. (1998). Sense-making theory and practice:
an overview of user interests in knowledge seeking
and use. Journal of Knowledge Management, 2(2):
36–46.
Dryburgh, P., Hartland, B., Ciula, A., and Lopez, T.
(2008). Editorial and metadata standards: the example
of the King’s College London Fine Rolls project. Paper
presented at Record Society Conference 2008, London,
23 June 2008.
Duguid, P. (1996). Material matters: the past and the
futurology of the book. In Nunberg, G. (ed.), The
Future of the Book. Brussels, Belgium: Brepols,
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
pp. 63–102. http://www2.parc.com/ops/members/
brown/papers/mm.html (accessed 28 April 2009).
Ellis, D. (1993). Modeling the information-seeking pat-
terns of academic researchers: a grounded theory
approach. Library Quarterly, 63(4): 469–86.
Faulhaber, C. B. (1991). Textual criticism in the 21st
century. Romance Philology, 45:123–48.
Kenny, A. (1992). Computers and the Humanities. Ninth
British Library Research Lecture. London: British
Library.
Kichuk, D. (2007). Metamorphosis: remediation in Early
English Books Online (EEBO). Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 22(3): 291–303.
Hairston, M. and Ruszkiewicz, J. J. (1996). The Scott,
Foresman Handbook for Writers, 4th edn. New York:
Harper Collins College Publishers.
Lucius, W. D. v. (2008). Publishers as elements of the
scientific communication system. Poiesis & Praxis:
International Journal of Technology Assessment and
Ethics of Science, 5(2): 125–37.
McCarty, W. (2005). Humanities Computing. London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Meho, L. and Tibbo, H. (2003). Modelling the informa-
tion-seeking behaviour of social scientists: Ellis’s study
revisited. JASTIS, 54(6): 570–87.
Nunberg, G. (1993). The places of books in the age of
electronic reproduction. Representations, 42(Special
Issue: Future Libraries): 13–37.
Palmer, C. L. (2004). Thematic research collections. In
Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., and Unsworth, J. (eds),
A Companion to Digital Humanities. Blackwell
Companions to Literature and Culture. Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 348–65.
Palmer, C. L. (2005). Scholarly work and the shaping
of digital access. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology, 56(11):
1140–53.
Sutherland, K. (2008). Being Critical: Paper-based editing
and the digital environment. In Deegan, M. and
Sutherland, K. (eds), Text Editing, Print and the
Digital World. Farnham: Ashgate.
Unsworth, J. (2000). Thematic research collections.
Paper presented at Modern Language Association
A. Ciula and T. Lopez
140 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Annual Conference, 28 December 2000. Washington,
DC. http://www.iath.virginia.edu/jmu2m/MLA.00/.
Wilson, T. (1999). Models in information behaviour
research. Journal of Documentation, 55.3: 249–70.
Notes
1 For a full historical introduction to the fine rolls of
Henry III by one of the project directors, Prof. David
Carpenter, visit the project website at: http://
www.frh3.org.uk/cocoon/frh3/content/about/historical_
intro.html (accessed September 2008).
2 A new set of membranes was sewn together to form a
roll for each regnal year (from 28 October, the date of
Henry’s first coronation, to 27 October).
3 For a detailed discussion of this model that combined
markup in TEI XML and an RDF/OWL ontology see
Ciula et al. (2008).
4 See for example, Ellis (1993) and a rigorous response to
it: in Meho and Tibbo (2003). For studies on a parti-
cular group of humanities researchers, see: Brown
(2002). For humanities research in a digital environ-
ment, see Bates et al. (1995) and the report by
Brockman et al. (2001). Within humanities computing,
the topic has been broached by Palmer (2004, 2005)
and in Buchanan et al. (2005).
5 See, in particular those developed for the report
Scholarly Work in the Humanities and the Evolving
Information Environment (Brockman et al., 2001).
6 An example of this is the analysis of the originalia rolls,
a set of documents that have a strong relationship with
the fine rolls. The significance of this only emerged
during preparation of volume 2 of the Fine Rolls calen-
dar which dedicates a substantial section of its front
matter to it.
7 Take for instance the case of references to ‘Margaret,
daughter of Warin fitz Gerold’ in the first set of
Henrician fine rolls: she occurs as identified in relation
to her father. However, in subsequent years such as
those that fall within volume 2, she appears as
‘Margaret de Redvers’, since she had become by then
the wife of Baldwin de Redvers. To retain the different
names and facilitate searching across volumes, both
names are recorded and cross-referenced, although in
volume 2 the entry ‘fitz Gerold, Margaret daughter of
Warin’ only acts as a lead-in term to the alternative
identification ‘as Margaret de Redvers, (entry
numbers)’.
8 It may be argued that print features such as running
heads as opposed to internal navigational menus on
the web do not rely as much on semantic processing of
the content to be read and therefore constitute a
rather refined aid to the reading activity by supporting
information seeking in a more intuitive manner.
9 See, for instance, the grouping of information under
the index entries for each person which is displayed on
the web under separate headings—‘roles’, ‘relation-
ships’, and ‘writs’—meanings which are left implicit
in the print indexes.
10 Compare to what McCarty calls ‘conflict over categor-
ization’ (McCarty, 2005, p. 123).
11 The citation format recommended for the rolls by the
Fine Rolls editors suggests that the author cites the
title of the publication (where ‘CFR’ stand for
‘Calendar of the Fine Rolls’), followed by the regnal
year, and the number of the entry as it appeared on
the membrane (editorially calculated). However, the
following text taken from the website demonstrates
that scholars themselves are struggling to communi-
cate about Fine Rolls published online versus those
published in the printed volumes: ‘Calendar of the
Fine Rolls of the Reign of Henry III 1216–17 (available
both on the Henry III Fine Rolls Project’s website
(http://www.finerolshenry3.org.uk) and within
Calendar of the Fine Rolls of the Reign of Henry III
1216–1234, ed. P. Dryburgh and B. Hartland, technical
ed. A. Ciula and J.M. Vieira, 2 vols. (Woodbridge,
2007–08)), no. 3 [. . .] naturally one only adds the
detail of book publication (which is ongoing for the
whole reign) where the roll cited has been published.
Since the website is being regularly updated with
Addenda and Corrigenda, users are strongly recom-
mended to supply the date upon which they accessed
the site when they give references: CFR 1219–20,
no. 20. (accessed September 2008)’. http://www.frh3.
org.uk/cocoon/frh3/content/links/citations.html
(accessed September 2008).
12 C 60/11 is the archival signature for the Fine Roll of
the 3rd regnal year of Henry III (28 October 1218–27
October 1219).
Reflecting on a dual publication
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 141
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
