Describing, transcribing, encoding,
and editing modern correspondence
material: a textbase approach
............................................................................................................................................................
Edward Vanhoutte and Ron Van den Branden
Centre for Scholarly Editing and Document Studies, Royal
Academy of Dutch Language and Literature, Belgium
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
While letters and correspondence materials serve as (in)valuable sources of infor-
mation for historians, philologists, (socio-)linguists, biographers, and textual
critics, modern editorial theory merely assigns them a secondary role. Contrary
to this traditional documentary view, the authors of this article argue for a
treatment of epistolary materials as primary sources in their own right. They
propose a generalized text-base approach of encoded and annotated correspon-
dence materials that can accomodate the generation of versatile user-driven
electronic editions. This approach needs to address current lacunae in markup
theory and practice, resulting in a lack for either provisions for the encoding
of letter-specific phenomena in texts, or encoding features for such generative
editions. A closer look at broader editorial theories reveals a deeper lack of
understanding of the nature and hence definition of correspondence materials.
The authors propose a Jakobsonian communicative definition of letters that to
a great deal can be mapped onto the textual model of the Text Encoding Initiative
(TEI). The second part of this article discusses the motivation for and practical
realization of Digital Archive of Letters in Flanders (DALF), a formal framework
for encoding correspondence materials which is defined as a TEI customization.
Its most important features for capturing detailed metadata as well as letter-
specific source phenomena are analysed and discussed against the text-
ontological background sketched out before.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
This essay was written in 2002. It has not been sig-
nificantly updated but reflects that particular
moment in the debate on electronic text.
sharing the resources collected or cataloged by a
documentary editing project can be one of the
greatest intellectual challenges a scholar faces.1
1 Introduction
It is almost impossible to list why the preservation,
edition, and study of correspondence material is of
great importance to our culture. Not only do
archives, repositories, and collections of manu-
scripts and letters constitute the backbone of our
cultural memory, they also provide the historian,
biographer, literary and textual critic—amongst
other scholars—with invaluable information con-
cerning the people, topics, events, or works under
study. The (socio-)linguist, the language geogra-
pher, and the linguist interested in diachronic or
synchronic research can generate very rich data
sets from well-constructed and consistently encoded
corpora of transcribed correspondence material.
Correspondence:
Edward Vanhoutte,
CTB-KANTL, Koningstraat
18, B-9000 Gent, Belgium.
E-mail:
edward.vanhoutte@kantl.be
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
77
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn035
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Such corpora can be subject stylometry and attribu-
tion studies, statistical research of all sorts, and lex-
icology.2 With respect to scholarly editing, a
conscientious analysis of the extant correspondence
material between an author and their friends, pub-
lishers, illustrators, critics etc. is indispensable for a
well-argumented reconstruction of the genesis of
their works, and can shed new light on questions
of authenticity, chronology, and assessment of the
sources as well as the history of publication and
reception. Letters can contain information about the
dating of manuscripts, possible lost sources, (forced)
revisions, and can for instance provide answers to
documentary, aesthetic, authorial, sociological, and
bibliographic questions. As Goethe has noticed, letters
indeed are amongst the most important monuments
which the individual can leave behind.3
In order to provide a multi-purpose and flexible
access to correspondence material, the Centre for
Scholarly Editing and Document Studies (CTB),
a research centre of the Royal Academy of Dutch
Language and Literature in Belgium, is building
a gradually growing Digital Archive of Letters in
Flanders focusing on epistolary material by authors
and composers of the 19th and 20th centuries,
which was acronymed DALF.4 In setting up DALF
as a textbase which could generate different pro-
ducts for both academia and a wider audience, a
number of problems have been identified which
will be dealt with in this article: text ontology, the
role of the editor and the encoder, the choice
between a textbase of transcribed correspondence
material from which editions can be generated and
a collection of electronic editions, the definition of a
letter, the construction of a formal framework for
the description and encoding of modern epistolary
material, and the function of such a textbase in
integrated networks assuring access to the material.
2 A Textbase of Letter
Transcriptions
Letters are typically quoted or partially published in
biographies and historical studies, or where appro-
priate (and the funding adequate) these monuments
are traditionally made accessible in scholarly edi-
tions of epistolary material. But the theories of
scholarly and documentary editing themselves and
the medium of the printed book usually prevent a
multifunctional use of their results. A scholarly edi-
tion always presents a reduced and constructed view
by the editor on the available complex and simple
documentary sources. This is done in compliance
with specific methodological principles, serving a
specific audience, and targeting at a specific goal.
All of this implies many decisions on the part of
the editor. This is why an edition which would
serve every thinkable use and audience has never
been produced. Therefore, the interested linguist
for instance cannot use a collection of critically
edited texts for research purposes, for they, strictly
speaking, misrepresent the historical document.
The call for including facsimiles of the originals
to overcome this lack of documentalism, brings no
solution to this problem. Facsimiles can however
represent the original truthfully, but they are as
static as the print medium, and leave the student
with the immense task of transcribing the documen-
tary source themselves, when they are not interested
in the reading text presented by the edition. This is
also true when computing the edition, for ‘the goal
of an electronic edition is to provide a version of the
text which is encoded so as to permit electronic
inspection, computer-assisted analysis, and retrieval,
to which the raw image is inherently resistant’.5
And, one can add, to which the print edition is
inherently resistant as well.
When providing a version of the text which
is encoded, the markup usually both looks back-
wards as representing something pre-existing
(the transcription of the documentary source) and
forwards to processing (the presentation of that
transcription).6 In the act of text-encoding, the
structural, semantic, and renditional features are
separated from the text by the use of markup
which traditionally comes in two kinds: descriptive
and procedural markup.7 This severe dichotomy
becomes problematic in the practice of electronic
scholarly editing where editors and encoders mean
and do different things according to which option is
chosen for the production of an edition. Generally
speaking there are three ways to produce a scholarly
edition with the use of text-encoding:
(1) Digitizing an existing print edition.
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
78 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(2) Creating an electronic edition, e.g. by record-
ing some or all of the known variations
among different witnesses to the text in a cri-
tical apparatus of variants.
(3) Generating electronic editions from encoded
transcriptions of the documentary source
material.
The scholarly editor and the text encoder as actors
in the production process behave differently in each
of these three scenarios:
(1) When digitizing an existing print edition the
encoder encodes the edition the editor has
created beforehand.
(2) When creating an electronic edition, the enco-
der and the editor are one and the same
person, or work as a team. The edition does
not exist outside the encoding.
(3) When generating an electronic edition from
encoded transcriptions, the encoder is an
editor in so far that transcribing is editing,
and the editor steers the automated generating
process resulting in spin-off products. Here,
when user-driven generation is provided in
the end product, the user of a textbase could
as well be considered an editor.
Or put simpler:
(1) The encoder encodes (transcribes) an edition.
(2) The encoder/editor creates (authors) an edition.
(3) The encoder encodes (transcribes) documen-
tary sources, the editor steers (authors) the
generation of an edition.
When relating this back to the descriptive/proce-
dural distinction, we see some problems occurring
when trying to label the markup as such and com-
bining this with the notions of transcriptional
and authorial markup. In digitizing an existing
print edition, for instance, the encoder uses
transcriptional markup that describes content
objects such as structural units and (semantic) func-
tions of the text, next to formatting. As Allen Renear
has pointed out, there has been a universal hesita-
tion about calling this markup descriptive: ‘The
reason for this hesitation is obvious: the sort of
thing that is being described, a formatting effect,
was always seen as the proper business of procedural
markup (to invoke); and not, typically, the business
of descriptive markup (to describe).’ Therefore
Renear suggested to refine the descriptive/proce-
dural distinction by two functional components:
mood and domain.8 This refinement proves to be
useful for our purpose in that it both articulates
the differences in encoding practice amongst the
three ways to produce scholarly editions, and it
clarifies the role of the encoder (see Table 1).
If digitizing an existing print edition results in a
one to one relationship between the published ori-
ginal and the digital representation of that original,
the transcriptional markup used to describe format-
ting (imposed on the text by the editor) cannot be
considered procedural or descriptive exclusively, but
is in fact markup which is in the indicative mood
(like descriptive markup and unlike procedural
markup) but with a renditional domain (like pro-
cedural markup and unlike descriptive markup).
The pure descriptive markup then is in the indica-
tive mood with a logical domain. In creating elec-
tronic editions through the use of markup, however,
the encoder/editor establishes a many to one rela-
tionship between the documentary sources and the
one electronic file which documents, e.g., textual
variation in a critical apparatus. By doing so, the
encoder/editor both transcribes the pre-existing
originals and constructs (authors) a tool such as
the apparatus variorum or criticus which is oriented
towards processing. We can say that the encoder
uses authorial markup in establishing such con-
structs (e.g. the use of the <app> element) which
Table 1 Allen Renear’s classification of markup applied to the editorial debate in this essay
Domain
Mood Imperative Indicative Performative
Renditional <underline> authorial <underline> transcriptional <app> authorial
Logical ??? <name> transcriptional <title> authorial
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 79
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
is in the performative mood with a renditional
domain.9 The author/editor is transcribing the
words in the different documentary sources, and
commands them to be a lemma or a reading inside
an apparatus of a newly constructed instance.10
In contrast with these two ways of producing a
scholarly edition, the third option is in its encoding
strategies not interested in the presentation of a text,
and thus strictly speaking does not look forward to
processing. Instead, the transcription of a documen-
tary source establishes a one to one relationship
with the unpublished original with the use of trans-
criptional markup in the indicative mood with
either a logical domain (when encoding functions
of the text and structural units) or a renditional
domain (when encoding formatting such as writing
material and [double] underlined words). Whereas
this encoding strategy and practice seem identical to
those used when digitizing an existing edition, the
difference lies in the different kind of source mate-
rial it wants to encode. Where the latter strategy is
aimed at establishing a one to one relationship with
a published and hence formatted edition which can
never fully represent the documentary source mate-
rials because of the authorial mediation on the part
of the editor, as we have argued, the former one
aims at establishing a one to one relationship with
the documentary source material itself. The presen-
tation of a text, then, is the focus of the generating
process which takes these transcriptions as a basis to
deliver several alternate views on that text.11
In assessing these three possibilities, their the-
ories of text-encoding, their consequential roles
and functions for the text-encoder and the editor,
and their processibility, the third option was con-
sidered most fit for the purpose of DALF which
Vanhoutte described as follows: ‘a methodology
and an open system architecture [. . .] for the digi-
tization, markup, and presentation in on-line, off-
line and hard-copy spin-off products of correspon-
dence material’.12
3 Computing the Edition: Markup
It may be clear from the previous that markup tech-
nology lies at the basis of such a methodology and
system. Previous work on the Electronic Streuvels
Project (ESP) which resulted in the publication of
the electronic-critical edition of De teleurgang van
den Waterhoek did recognize the fact that TEI
could be used for the encoding of most of the letter
contents, but added to this the need for a subset of
letter-specific elements.13 In the electronic diplo-
matic edition of 71 letters between the famous
Flemish novelist Stijn Streuvels (1871–1969) and
his publishers and friends, Vanhoutte justified the
creation of a project-specific StreuLet Document
Type Definition (DTD) as follows: ‘Because the over-
all project uses the TEILite subset, and upgrading to
the full DTD was at that time for practical reasons
not debatable, I heavily relied on the TEI guidelines
to develop a project-specific DTD which allows for
both descriptive and procedural markup and which
includes a set of letter-specific elements, rather than
doing the theoretically unwise thing of modifying the
TEILite DTD.’14 But the ‘full’ TEI could be extended
of course.
The first initiative that addressed the issue of
markup for correspondence material explicitly,
and which extended the TEI for this purpose, was
the Model Edition Partnership (MEP)15 which ‘is a
consortium of twelve editorial projects which pub-
lish printed editions of historical documents for the
use of students, scholars and the public at large’
and wants ‘to develop a foundation for the next
generation of historical editions’, i.e. ‘electronic
Fig. 1 The three production models in relation to their
source materials
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
80 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
editions disseminated via the internet or on CD-
ROM (or its equivalent)’.16 The authors of A
Prospectus for Electronic Historical Editions note
that ‘[i]f historical editions are to be part of tomor-
row’s digital libraries, extending the TEI markup is
the logical path’.17 For this purpose, the MEP cre-
ated a set of ‘additional markup tags required for
historical editions’ such as tags for grouping the
<sender>, <addressee>, and <dateline> inside a
<head> at the top of the edition of the letter in
the <body> of the document, the <ps> tag which
contains the postscript of a letter, tags for direct and
indirect references to names, people, organizations,
places, or ships, etc. However, an apparent pref-
erence for a procedural approach towards their
encoding strategy makes this markup scheme inap-
propriate for DALF, as can be demonstrated by three
examples:
 The possibility to opt out of the formal TEI
header in favour of the less formal
<mepHeader> with ten optional elements results
in hardcoding in the body of the letter metadata
such as sender, receiver, date, etc. which is
inferred from the contents of the letter, the envel-
ope or some extra epistolary material and which
in our opinion should exclusively go in the
header of a document.18 By documenting this
information in a virtual heading of the letter,
which is put there in analogy with the heading
of an edited letter in a conventional letter edition,
the editor/encoder switches from transcribing
documentary sources to creating an edition of
these sources. The alternative is transcribing the
documentary sources truthfully and considering
inferred information such as sender, receiver,
date and place as header material from
which the heading of an edited letter can be
generated.19
 The MEP distinguishes among three levels of
transcription and provides four DTDs for gra-
dual markup. The first and basic level is
‘mostly motivated by typographic phenomena
(paragraphs and other blocks of type, and font
shifts within blocks)’ and because of that MEP
recognizes that ‘it is not very useful for searching
a collection of documents (the sender and
addressee of a document, for example, are not
identified as such), but it is sufficient for produ-
cing adequate paper or screen display of docu-
ments. Since both editors and users of editions
spend a lot of time reading documents, level-one
markup is essential.’ The second level adds
hyperlinks for cross-references and notes: ‘This
level of markup is thus essential for online dis-
play and use of the edition, whether by editorial
staff or by readers’. In level 3 markup, then,
‘additional markup is added for typographically
indistinct, but intellectually important, phenom-
ena like names, dates, etc. From the level 3 DTD
the data can be translated automatically into the
archival form.’ We doubt that merely rendering
the document on the screen or on paper should
be the basic interest of an editorial enterprise and
think that constituting an archival form of the
letter comes first. Adding hyperlinks can then
be automated, and online and paper displays
generated. The danger of such a gradual
markup system is that projects might chose, for
financial reasons or other, not to go as far as level
3 encoding, and hence will never produce satis-
factory archival files.
 The MEP divides historical editions in the elec-
tronic environment into three models: image
editions, live text editions, and combined edi-
tions, and suggests transitional editions as a
fourth model assuring continued access to exist-
ing scholarship.20 Although the prospectus men-
tions that ‘[i]n general, a single electronic format
should be chosen for the master archival copy of
the edition from which published versions can be
derived by automated means (i.e. by software),’
and thus suggests kinship with the third option
in producing electronic editions, i.e. to generate
electronic editions (cf. infra), we have seen that
only the third level markup can cater for that
option. One can assume therefore that different
kinds of historical editions are mostly digitized or
created (the two other options in creating elec-
tronic editions), and thus focus on display more
than markup.
Although the MEP has proven useful for
the creation and digitization of historical editions,
its theoretical approach and application is not fit for
the use and purpose of DALF. MEP and DALF have
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 81
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
in common their striving for a framework which
enables the production of scholarly (historical)
editions and documenting that framework as an
extension to and modification of the TEI. They
differ, however, where MEP is oriented towards
the creation and production of such
editions, whereas DALF is focused on the creation
of a textbase from which such and other editions
can be generated. The markup used is hence more of
a transcriptional nature and is based on the work
proposed by the TEI, MASTER (Manuscript Access
through Standards for Electronic Records), and
StreuLet.21
Consequently, four considerations influenced the
overall design of the DTD:
(1) First, the DTD should be designed for the
transcription of primary source material,
from which letter editions can be generated.
(2) Second, the DTD should allow to store
detailed metadata about the transcribed docu-
ment. This is the point where MASTER
proved useful.
(3) Third, the DTD should be able to cater for
the markup of letter-specific features, such
as the envelope information, the postscript
etc.
(4) Fourth, the DTD should allow for a general
application to letter transcriptions and edi-
tions and should not restrict itself to the spe-
cific corpus of letters currently involved in the
DALF project.
But in order to ‘provide a version of the text
which is encoded’ as Julia Flanders put it, and
develop a formal framework for that encoding we
must have a fairly good idea of the nature of the
texts we want to encode—i.e. letters—and the fea-
tures of the text which need encoding.
4 A Letter is a Letter is a Letter . . .
In scholarly editions of literary and musical
works, relevant letters and other documents are
very often not included as edited texts, but their
contents is paraphrased and/or summarized
in the commentary, the annotations, or the
biographical or genetic article which accompanies
the edition. Together with contracts, reviews,
reports, diaries, etc. they belong to the so-called
category of the secondary source material to which
the theory and practice of historical, documentary,
or non-critical editing is applied.22 The primary
source material, then, consists of the carriers of
the extant versions of the work, and is edited in
interaction with the theories and practices of the
main schools of critical editing and literary, genetic,
or textual criticism.23 The status and treatment of
correspondence material in scholarly editing, there-
fore, depends not on its appearance or form, but on
its contents and function in a wider context. When a
letter contains (unpublished) works or versions of
a work, it is upgraded to the primary source league,
and the versions or variants it contains could
either feature as a reading text or could be men-
tioned in the apparatus criticus or variorum.
Otherwise, if published, the (edited) correspon-
dence material appears as a subsidiary ‘product’ to
the scholarly edition. Stated otherwise: letters can be
valuable sources for the annotation or commentary
of critical edition of works, but they themselves need
to be annotated and edited as well.
Not only is the treatment of correspondence
material problematic in scholarly editing, there is
also no common agreement on the very definition
of a letter. A letter is not a type of text as is prose,
poetry, or drama, but the concept of a letter hints at
a form which can contain all types of texts, images,
or objects. The first step in building a textbase of
correspondence material, therefore, is to define pre-
cisely what the project considers a letter. Only then,
find and retrieval tools, user interfaces etc. can be
built for the exploitation of the textbase, and the
material can be edited.
In his article ‘Some Notes on Letter Editing’ the
German editor and theorist Siegfried Scheibe pro-
vides us with a useful definition which we take
as our starting point. According to Scheibe, [b]y a
‘‘letter’’ we understand written messages, informa-
tion or orders which are meant to inform other
persons (the addressee) and which were not written
for publication. As a rule, they have a standard form
beginning with a salutation, ending with a signature
and frequently containing a date.’24
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
82 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
This definition can be formally represented by
the following algorithm:
Scheibe suggests this definition because of his
dissatisfaction with the impracticality of the postal
definition of a letter, but he fails to precise what that
postal definition is. We assume that the definition
the dictionary gives, approaches what Scheibe had
in mind. For our purpose, we use the denotation
given by van Dale Groot Woordenboek der
Nederlandse Taal, the standard dictionary of
Dutch. A letter is: ‘Writing in the form of an
address, to one or more absent persons, aimed to
let him (them) know something, closed and sent
supplied with an address.’25
This can be formalized as:
At first sight, both definitions indeed differ
from each other, but when we assume that sending
a letter implies a stamp, a postmark, and thus a
date,26 and when we take into account the knowl-
edge from reality that the formal characteristics such
as ‘salutation’ and ‘signature’ are but optional fea-
tures, both definitions seem to be identical. That is,
apart from the distinction Scheibe makes amongst
several types of letters: ‘written messages, informa-
tion or orders’, which cannot be formally repre-
sented but function as qualifiers.27
The Dutch editor and author of Naar de Letter a
handbook on scholarly editing, Marita Mathijsen,
elaborates on Scheibe’s definition by pointing at
the vital communicative relationship between the
author of the letter and the addressee, and by
adding to it that the letter, which she defines as
‘text’, is meant to be sent or handed over to the
person to whom it is addressed.28 With Scheibe,
she concludes that therefore the public letter, the
letter to the editor, and the epistolary novel can all
be excluded from treatment in an edition of corre-
spondence material, just as contracts, memoranda,
claims, and proofs of payment. Scheibe adds to this
that business-like documents which are transmitted
in the form of a letter likewise do not belong in a
letter edition.29 We do not agree with Scheibe on
this point, for the correspondences from and to
authors, artists, scientists, statesmen, etc. not only
contain invaluable information for the study of the
genesis, production, meaning and reception of their
work, for the reconstruction and a better under-
standing of the contemporary society and mentality
in which they lived, worked, loved, and interacted
with each other and with an audience, but corre-
spondence material gradually becomes more impor-
tant to economic, psychological, political, and social
sciences, and to the history and philosophy of
science as well. These disciplines consider the
so-called Aktenschriftstu¨ck of equal importance as
private letters, and very often they contain comple-
mentary information. The line along which private
correspondence and business letters differ from each
other is very hard to draw. In an essay on the edition
of Charles Darwin’s correspondence, Frederick
Burkhardt contends that ‘[s]ome memoranda are
signed and can with good reason be considered let-
ters that simply lack a salutation and valedictory.’30
One can even point out, be it as a rhetorical state-
ment, that if the business of an author or composer
is writing and composing respectively, each letter
dealing with the act and the problems of writing
and composing should thus be considered business
letters and hence should not be included in an
edition.
The formal (objective) structure which defines
a text as a letter, thus, cannot be used as an argu-
ment in favour or against inclusion in an edition
of letters. The quality of privateness which has to
be (subjectively) assessed by the editor,31 on the
contrary, is an argument.32 Therefore, even the
most documentary or diplomatic treatment of cor-
respondence material is always subjective in its
selection.
In an attempt to draw principles for the selec-
tion of documents for an edition of correspon-
dence material, the basis question ‘What is a
letter?’ often is inverted and leads the debate of
what to include in an edition to an enumeration
of what not to include in an edition, and conse-
quently to a negative definition of what a letter
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 83
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
is not. Irmtraut Schmid, for example defines a letter
as follows: ‘A letter is a communicative piece of
writing which has not become a business
document.’33
So far, the same negative principle was involved
in the rejection of these definitions of a letter. In the
following part, we will try to establish a positive
definition by building on their commonalities.
5 A Simple Description of Letters
In the definitions we have seen so far, the commu-
nicative function of a letter features as a common
denominator. According to Irmtraut Schmid, the
urge to transfer a message and thus to establish
a communicative situation is one of the common
motives for the origin of all extant documentary
material which she calls the ‘testimony of the
past’.34 A relevant model for the analysis of this
communicative situation has been offered by the
Russian philologist Roman Jakobson who described
six constitutive factors35 in his communicative
model which he linked to communicative functions.
His model schematizes as follows36:
When we consider the letter as physical
channel through which the communicative situ-
ation is established, this model provides us with
the elements for a simple formal description of
a letter:
 the sender (<sender>);
 the message (<body>);
 the recipient (<recipient>);
 references to the extra-linguistic reality (e.g.
<title>, <name>, <place>, <date>, etc.);
 the language of the letter (<language>); and
 the physical characteristics of a letter, e.g. the
collation (<coll>), the envelope and its features
(<envelope>), etc.
Almost all of these features can be encoded using
the DTD subsets as proposed by the TEI Guidelines
for Electronic Text Encoding and Interchange.37 But
letters are much more complicated material than
suggested by the communicative model, as will
become clear from the rest of this article.
Therefore, we chose to extend these guidelines to
enable a detailed transcription of correspondence
material for input in our textbase.
In what follows we will briefly describe the cus-
tomization process, then elaborate on the problems
of storing detailed metadata about the transcribed
document and the markup of letter-specific fea-
tures, with a focus on an important problem area
for the encoding of handwritten primary source
material, namely the complex correlations of logical
and physical structures.
6 Customization of the TEI
The TEI encoding scheme provides an excellent
starting point for many of the features one would
like to encode in letters. However, the TEI tagset has
some generally acknowledged lacunae regarding the
encoding of primary source material.38 Moreover,
apart from some features relating to primary manu-
script material in general, an open collection of
digitally encoded letters requires the means to
encode some very specific textual and meta-textual
features that are not covered by the TEI scheme. An
attempt at overcoming this ‘representational
vacuum’ could be made by looking for standard
TEI tags that most closely correspond to the struc-
tural and semantic requirements of the (meta-)tex-
tual elements to encode. The advantage of having a
plain vanilla TEI DTD for the encoding of corre-
spondence material wouldn’t, however, outweigh
the disadvantage of this DTD only looking like a
TEI DTD, for some of its elements would have dif-
ferent meanings or distributions than described in
the TEI Guidelines. Moreover, such a solution does
not guarantee a faithful representation of the text
Table 2 Jakobson’s communicative model
Semiotic factor Illustration Communicative
function
Addresser Sender Emotive
Message Message in code Poetic
Addressee Receiver Conative
Context Extra-linguistic reality Referential
Code Natural language Meta-lingual
Contact Letter Phatic
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
84 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
ontology. For example, straightforward as it may
seem, encoding a postscript as <div type¼‘‘ps’’>
would force an uncomfortable view on the textual
status of the letter. Since a <div> element, as the TEI
Guidelines document, is meant to indicate a subdi-
vision of a text, this would not fit a postscript very
well. There is no reason to consider a postscript
more of a subdivision than a paragraph, with its
own <p> tag, or a salutation formula, with its
<salute> tag. Even if such an ontological-theoretical
objection would be accepted in a model for letter
encoding, it still leaves the markup-theoretical fact
that in this case, a TEI <div> element would be used
for something other than a real subdivision.
Realizing the limitations of the text ontology it
offers and anticipating the danger of intolerable
stretching of TEI semantics, the TEI DTD has
been provided with structural extension mechan-
isms that are clearly documented in Chapter 29
of the TEI Guidelines. The arguments pointed out
above motivated the adoption of this approach in
the construction of the DALF DTD. Of the 281 ele-
ments it contains, 221 are taken over from the TEI
tagset and 60 are uniquely defined for DALF.
The extensions and modifications—encoded in
DALFExtns.ent and DALFExtns.dtd files—were
input in the Pizza Chef program on the interactive
TEI website,39 which neatly produced the DALF.dtd
file. The following parameters were used:
 a ‘mixed base’ tagset was selected, consisting of
the prose and drama bases,
 elements from the additional tagsets linking, fig-
ures, analysis, transcr, textcrit, and names.dates
were selected
 the entity sets ISOlat1, ISOlat2, ISOnum, and
ISOpub were selected.
These selection parameters are inspired by the
diverging types of information conveyed in letters.
Being highly authorial ego-documents, they come in
many form(at)s, thus requiring many representa-
tional means to capture them. The choice for a
mixed base tagset reflects the multi-faceted status
of the letter regarding conventional text ‘genres’. It
is highly plausible to encounter fragments of poems,
dramas, novels, synopses and the like in the corre-
spondence of writers.40 Also the elements of the
additional tagsets are selected to anticipate the
manifold textual features in letters on the one
hand and the desires of encoders to make more
elaborate annotations on the other hand. The ISO
entity sets ensure a computer- and human-readable
annotation of non-standard textual characters,
allowing the encoding of, for example, the character
u¨ with the ISO reference &uuml; rather than the
more obscure Unicode reference &#x00FC;.
As the emphasis of this article lies in specific
issues concerning the encoding of correspondence
material, the following sections will illuminate
the way in which some of those motivated the
declaration of the 60 unique DALF elements,
rather than discuss the TEI elements included in
the DALF DTD (for a discussion of which
the reader is directed to the excellent TEI reference
documentation).
7 Some Relevant DALF Elements
The most typical structure for a letter encoded with
the DALF scheme may look like this:
<TEI.2>
<teiHeader>...</teiHeader>
<text>
<envelope>...</envelope>
<body>
<opener>
<address>...</address>
<dateline>...</dateline>
<salute>...</salute>
. . .
</opener>
<p>...</p>
<closer>
<salute>...</salute>
<signed>...</signed>
<ps>...</ps>
. . .
</closer>
</body>
<back>
<note>...</note>
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 85
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The conception of DALF as a growing textbase
linking archive records to the actual contents of the
transcribed letters requires the possibility to encode a
rich amount of letter-specific meta-information in the
header from which catalogue entries, indexes, etc. can
be generated. This is of vital importance to the orga-
nization and management of the textbase, functioning
either as a stand-alone digital archive or in an inte-
grated network. The text then is the place for the
actual transcription of the documentary source.
7.1 The header
As already mentioned, a useful model for the exten-
sion of the TEI header was found in the DTD and
guidelines developed for the MASTER project, which
was ‘intended primarily for the detailed cataloguing
of medieval and early modern manuscript materials
in the Western European tradition’. The envisioned
outline of DALF differs, however, in two major
aspects from the goals of the MASTER project:
 DALF is designed as a textbase of transcriptions
and electronic editions of primary sources
(whereas, the MASTER project aims at a data-
base of manuscript description records).
 DALF focuses on an archive of transcriptions of
modern correspondence (whereas, the MASTER
project is aimed at documenting medieval
manuscripts).
Instead of extending the MASTER DTD (a TEI
extension itself), we used the MASTER scheme as a
source of inspiration for a distinct TEI customiza-
tion. This allowed us to add or delete elements, and
to streamline their naming, attributes and content
models where appropriate, adhering to the follow-
ing principles:
 In order to keep the analogy and semantics trans-
parent, all letter-specific elements in the header
have been named starting with ‘let-’.
 In order to ensure consistent encoding of
DALF documents and to facilitate their
integration into a searchable electronic database,
we opted for a fairly strict design of the
header. This resulted in several mandatory
elements or choices between alternatives.
 To ensure flexibility, optional <note> elements
are allowed after mandatory contents.
The main feature of the DALF DTD is the exten-
sion of the <sourceDesc> element of the standard
TEI header with <letDesc>, grouping meta-infor-
mation about each encoded document. This
<letDesc> element is required for each DALF docu-
ment, and contains mandatory elements for
the encoding of information about the identi-
fication, catalogue summary, physical description,
and presence of an envelope. Optionally, infor-
mation about the contents, history, additional
aspects, or specific parts of the letter may be
provided.
We will not deal with each element of <letDesc>
in detail, but instead we will just run through a
presentation of the element content models which
should be more or less self-declarative.
 <letIdentifier>: identifies the letter both on the
macro-level (<country>, <region>, <settle-
ment>, <institution>, and <repository>) and
on the micro-level (<collection>, <idno>, and
<altName>). Most of the letters that will consti-
tute the DALF database will be unpublished pri-
mary manuscripts that are stored in private or
public collections, located at particular places.
Therefore, there is need for a more detailed
level of cataloguing description than for pub-
lished source materials, providing researchers
with a uniform and accurate system of archival
reference for each letter.
<join>...</join>
...
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
86 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 <letHeading>: allows for a structured description
of bibliographical information of a letter. One of
the essential characteristics of letters is their close
relationship with the particular communicative
context in which they are created. Of course,
this also holds for published books, written by a
certain author and at a certain place and time. Yet,
as bibliographic references to books show, those
particular communicative circumstances of the
writing act are deemed less important than the
circumstances of publication. In contrast, when
referring to letters as unambiguously as possible,
one has to include as much of the communicative
particularities possible. Those are so important
that they may be considered an essential part of
the bibliographical identification of a letter. This
element is the place for abstractions about sender,
addressee, place, and date of the letter. The ele-
ments comprised by this element have the attri-
bute ‘attested’ with the possible values ‘yes’ when
the abstraction is made on the basis of evidence
inside the letter, ‘added’ when it is made on the
basis of material accompanying the letter, or ‘no’
when it is derived from external evidence.
 <physDesc>: describes aspects of the physical
appearance of letters. As letters can be very dif-
ferent with regard to their physical realization,
the description of physical aspects contains a lim-
ited set of elements for features that are shared by
all letters, and additionally provides the possibi-
lity to encode a rich array of specific phenomena
when they occur. Required elements are a char-
acterization of the format of the letter, a descrip-
tion of the material on which the letter is written,
and an indication of the physical size of the docu-
ment. Additionally, general aspects of layout can
be pointed out, as well as a characterization of
possible fragments of musical notation, a descrip-
tion of possible decorative elements or parapher-
nalia, and the condition of the letter as a physical
object.
 <envOcc/>: documents the occurrence of an
envelope. The envelope can contain valuable
information for the contextualization of a letter,
or even contain text that may be closely related to
the contents of the letter. However, the question
whether or not to regard this text as part of the
letter is a theoretical one. Some encoders may
wish to exclude envelope contents completely;
others may consider it relevant enough to include
<letIdentifier>
<country>Belgium</country>
<settlement>Antwerp</settlement>
<repository>AMVC</repository>
<collection>S 935 / 62295</collection>
<idno>171373/2882</idno>
</letIdentifier>
<letHeading>
<author attested=‘‘yes’’>Stijn
Streuvels</author>
<addressee attested=‘‘yes’’>Maurice
De Meyer</addressee>
<placeLet attested=‘‘no’’>Ingooigem
</placeLet>
<dateLet attested=‘‘added’’>1945-01-13
</dateLet>
</letHeading>
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 87
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
it as part of the letter. The DALF encoding scheme
allows (and strongly suggests) a middle road, by
providing the special <envelope> body element
(see further) that enables the encoding of envelope
content while at the same time keeping it separate
from the letter proper. In order to facilitate retrie-
val of documents in the DALF textbase, the ele-
ment <envOcc/> that explicates the presence or
absence of an envelope is adopted as a mandatory
element of the letter description. It is an empty
element that has one required attribute @occ,
which can have either ‘yes’ or ‘no’ as its value.
 <letContents>: describes the contents of a letter.
The contents of the letter are of course a major
source of interest for users of encoded DALF
materials. In order to ensure a rich possibility
of exploiting the DALF textbase, structured
access to descriptive records of its cumulative
contents is an interesting starting point. It can
be used to implement a search mechanism that
lets users do thematic queries throughout several
(selections of) DALF letters, or provide the
means to generate thematic editions like a
regest or calendar edition. This is also the place
to document a formal characterization of a letter
according to a certain typology in a <class>
element. We think of a functional-communica-
tive ‘genre’-indication of letters (cf. the
Jakobsonian communicative functions).
7.2 Letter-specific text elements
Considering now the actual encoding of letters itself,
the TEI had to be extended to cater for some letter-
specific features. Obviously, there are some structural
elements that are unique to letters, like the envelope
and postscripts. Others are more generally bound to
primary manuscript material, and thus occur very
frequently in letters, such as calculations, pre- and
post-printed materials, and decorative elements.
 <envelope>: contains the information on the
envelope. The typical letter is delivered within
an envelope. Often, when letters are stored, their
accompanying envelopes are stored with them.
For an encoder, there are good reasons to provide
transcriptions of letters with a transcription of
their envelopes. One is that envelopes may con-
tain valuable information for the identification of
letters. When the letter is lacking some of the
indicators of the communicative context that
are important for an unambiguous identification
of a letter (communicative participants, time, and
place of writing), there is good chance they still
can be deduced from the postal information on
the envelope. Furthermore, the envelope may
contain significant information, apart from the
postal data. Some authors create on their envel-
opes pieces of art in their own right that may
closely relate and contribute to the letter content.
Some receivers may use the envelope to write
quick notes about the letter content or other con-
textual circumstances. Envelopes may even con-
tain drafts of successive letters. In response to
such diverse types of textual content, the means
are provided to document the occurrence of a
<letContents>
<class>love letter</class>
<p>Streuvels proposes to his girlfriend</p>
</letContents>
<physDesc>
<type>letter</type>
<support>
<p>single page with pre-printed
letterhead, writing on one
side only</p>
</support>
<extent>
<dimensions>
<height units=‘‘mm’’>214</height>
<width units=‘‘mm’’>276</width>
</dimensions>
</extent>
</physDesc>
<envOcc occ=‘‘no’’/>
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
88 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
postmark, addresses on front and/or back, possi-
bly additional plain text, or no text at all, and even
the containment of another envelope. The format
can be supplied as a value for the ‘type’ attribute
in <envelope>. The occurrence of an empty
envelope can be signalled within <note>. Text
on an envelope can be encoded within an
<envPart> element, with an attribute @side to
specify the envelope part concerned. Envelope
text can be an address of the sender or recipient,
a postmark, or plain text.
 <ps>: contains a postscript in a letter or letter
part. Postscripts are a typical phenomenon for
letters. Occurring after the closing formulae
and salutation, they form a last addition to the
contents of the letter. Moreover, the author often
explicitly signals this additional status with the
abbreviation ‘P.S.’. Their formulaic use and
meaning justify an own tag. Therefore, the
<ps> element is adopted in the DALF DTD to
appear only at the back within the <closer>
element.
 <calc>: contains a calculation. Calculations fre-
quently occur in modern correspondence.
Formally, calculations are often set apart from
running text, and it may be desirable to mark
them with explicit encoding features. This pro-
vides researchers with greater control over the
textual features they want to study. Calculations
have an internal structure the semantics of which
cannot be captured sufficiently with the standard
TEI <num> element. We considered the option
to incorporate MathML, an existing W3C stan-
dard providing a specialized tagset for mathema-
tical formulae. In Chapter 22.2 of the TEI P4
guidelines, directions are given for specifying
external tagsets as XML notations that can be
used in the <formula> tag. However, testing
that mechanism with the literal examples given
in that chapter turned out unsuccessfully. Further
investigation of postings on the TEI public mailing
list41 showed that other TEI users encountered the
same problems, and learned that the incorporation
mechanism itself does not provide the inclusion
functionality we had in mind. These troubles and
the unwieldy suggestions to get around the incor-
poration of external tagsets like MathML,42 as well
as the complexity of the MathML standard itself
made this option less favourable than devising a
specialized element that can encode at least some
of the semantic structure of calculations in a
<envelope>
<envPart side¼‘‘front’’>
<address type¼‘‘addressee’’>
<addrLine>De Heer Styn Streuvels
</addrLine>
<addrLine>‘‘Lijsternest’’</addrLine>
<addrLine><hi rend¼‘‘underlined’’>
INGOYGHEM</hi></addrLine>
</address>
<postmark>
<date value¼‘‘1924-01-04’’>4.I.1924
</date>
<placeName><place>ANTWERPEN
</place></placeName>
</postmark>
</envPart>
</envelope>
<closer>
<salute>Met vriendelijken groet</salute>
<signed>(Styn Streuvels)</signed>
<ps><p id¼"xr2"><add id¼"add1">
<abbr expan¼"postscriptum">P.S.</abbr> Ze
jubileeren bij de firma Veen
(60 jaar bestaan)<ptr target¼"n8"/>
en er wordt me daarom gevraagd, door
het comit&eacute;: hoeveel geld ik
daarvoor als feestgave wensch te geven!
Zonderlinge zeden? Als ik nu eens
vroeg: hoeveel ze voor mij beschikken
als 75-jarige jubilaris!</add></p>
</ps>
</closer>
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 89
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
rudimentary way. Calculations may partly or
entirely consist of plain prose (thus possibly need-
ing some phrase-level TEI elements), and can con-
tain embedded calculations. The basic structure,
however, is made up of one or more arguments,
an operator, and a result.
 <print>: signals printed material that was present
on the carrier of the letter, or added afterwards.
Letters may be written (or printed) on paper
(or other support material) containing pre-
printed text like letterheads, form data,
newspaper articles, ads and so on. There are also
similar formal text elements, like stamps, that
may be added after the composition of the
letter. Such text fragments can be seen as part
of the letter, but may need to be distinguished
from more ‘authorial’ parts of the letter, as
they mostly have an impersonal character. It is
imaginable that such material would be
excluded from e.g. a linguistic study on the lan-
guage of a writer, or selected in a study on
stamps in letters. The TEI tagset does not contain
any element that can accurately indicate pre-
printed text material. Post-printed material, like
stamps, could possibly be tagged with the TEI
<add> element. However, as that element is
reserved for ‘letters, words, or phrases inserted
in the text by an author, scribe, annotator, or
corrector’, it is questionable whether mostly
impersonal stamps can be regarded as genuine
additions in that sense. Therefore, in order to
provide consistent treatment for all pre- and
post-printed material, the <print> element is
included in the DALF DTD.
8 Correlations of Logical and
Physical Structures
As emphasized in the chapter ‘A Gentle
Introduction to XML’ of the TEI Guidelines, every
encoding effort involves the abstraction of an
underlying interpretation: ‘Encoding a text for com-
puter processing is in principle, like transcribing a
manuscript from scriptio continua, a process of
making explicit what is conjectural or implicit, a
process of directing the user as to how the
content of the text should be (or has been)
<calc>
<arg>969 <abbr expan¼"exemplaren">ex.
</abbr> (zie afrekening van
30.8.41)</arg>
<oper>-</oper>
<arg>138<abbr expan¼"exemplaren">ex
</abbr> (
<calc>
<arg>133 <abbr expan¼"exemplaren"> ex.
</abbr> verkocht</arg>
<oper>þ</oper>
<arg>5 <abbr expan¼"persexemplaren">
persex.</abbr></arg>)
</calc>
</arg>
<result><hi rend¼‘‘double underlined’’>
831</hi>
<abbr expan¼"exemplaren">ex.
</abbr>
</result>
</calc>
<print
type¼‘‘letterhead’’>FRANK&middot;LATEUR
</print>
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
90 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
interpreted’. The development of the DALF DTD
has thus been an effort to establish an interpretative
framework for the encoding of letters. However, in
this process, we saw ourselves confronted with more
fundamental boundaries of the format chosen to
express this framework. The well-formedness con-
straint of proper nesting of elements in XML
imposes a so-called ‘Ordered Hierarchy of Content
Objects (OHCO)’ view on XML documents, and
hence on XML-encoded versions of existing texts.
This forces some abstraction on the encoding
scheme that can remain fairly implicit as long as
no competing hierarchies are involved. A problem
arises, however, when one wants to make explicit
assumptions of the text which are situated on dif-
ferent structural levels. Since our approach to the
encoding of handwritten primary source material is
deliberately documentary, we encountered some
markup-technical as well as theoretical difficulties
in aligning this with the mainly logical orientation
of the TEI markup scheme on which the DALF
scheme is built
8.1 Technical difficulties: overlapping
hierarchies
In the course of the encoding process of the letters
in this project, an important issue was raised con-
cerning the use of the TEI scheme for the transcrip-
tion of chronological, authorial, and physical
aspects of (handwritten) primary sources.
Consider the above (fake) example which illus-
trates the documentary complexity we’re sometimes
dealing with: a number of paragraphs by author 1,
including a shift in writing direction, with an addi-
tion by a second author 2 written across two phy-
sically distinct pieces of paper.
The overlap of logical structures (paragraphs),
authorial and chronological features (the addition),
and physical structures (the distinct pieces of paper,
the writing orientation) are of interest to us.
The TEI P4 guidelines propose a number of ways
to deal with similar overlapping structures. One is
the use of empty elements ‘to mark the beginnings
and endings of regions of the text which have some-
thing in common’. As these elements do not contain
the text region as their content, they can interfere
with other hierarchical units without causing over-
lap. Although logically transparent, this approach
encumbers the processing of these structures by
XML software. Another possibility is to use start
and end tags for all these different structural
levels, but to avoid overlap by splitting up overlap-
ping structures into several elements. This, however,
complicates the encoding and does not allow
straightforward processing.
This problem of encoding multiple overlapping
hierarchies with XML is generally acknowledged,
and a number of other solutions (independent of
TEI) are proposed. Thompson and McKelvie sug-
gest the construction of separate files containing (a
premature form of) XLink that create virtual spans
of annotation in a source text.43 Durusau and
O’Donnell propose a model of ‘Bottom Up Virtual
Hierarchies’, which involves the physical separation
of different markup hierarchies into different files
(each file holding a different markup ‘view’ on the
text), and a virtual join of these markup schemes in
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 91
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a derived base file. In that base file, each word is
encoded separately, and an attribute is included for
each distinct hierarchical layer. Those attributes get
as their value XPath expressions that record the
hierarchical position of the word concerned in the
according hierarchy.44 Other suggested solutions
abandon the XML paradigm and investigate the
development of other formats allowing real encod-
ing of overlapping elements. These include MECS
and TexMECS.45 More recently, a data structure was
proposed, named GODDAG, that should allow the
representation in and translation between MECS,
TexMECS, and XML, but ‘is still very much a
work in progress’.46 Durusau and O’Donnell note
that the standoff methods of approaches such as
TECS and TexMECS ‘suffer from a variety of
defects, ranging from non-implementation to a
fairly high degree of notational complexity.’ Also,
their own BUVH approach does not seem to be a
really practical working solution, as the project web-
site states that the verbosity and processing difficul-
ties of the BUVH model inspired them to investigate
a new thread of research, named ‘Just-In-Time-
Trees’ (JITTs).47 In another paper, the authors
explain that this proposal involves adapting the
XML processing model itself so that it allows multi-
ple root elements and thus overlapping hierarchies.
Also this proposal is very much (the announcement
of) work in progress.48
In the absence of a ready-to-use, generally
accepted way of dealing with overlapping hierar-
chies in XML, a TEI-conformant solution was
adopted in the DALF DTD, exploiting the above
mentioned suggestion of using empty elements,
and centred around a notion of textual ‘layers’.
Bearing in mind the processing difficulties inherent
to empty elements, a mechanism was adopted to
express a minimal ‘layer’ view on documents, in a
way that avoids both the possibility of overlap with
the encoding of logical structures, and also an over-
generalised use of empty elements. However inter-
esting a very neutral ‘layer’ concept might be,
allowing the encoder to distinguish and define sev-
eral types of layers (chronological, physical, author-
ial, thematic,. . .), this would hold the danger of
allowing a great deal of textual structures to be
marked up with empty elements. In order to
minimize this strategy as much as possible, the
semantics of a ‘layer’ concept was reduced to a phy-
sical level. This means that a letter can be seen as a
complex of physical layers, pieces of physical con-
tainers for the logical structures. When different
layers are distinguished, their boundaries can be
indicated with empty start and end tags to virtually
enclose the physical area concerned, in a way that
does not disturb the proper nesting of other ele-
ments. The logical aspects that were distinguished
at the start of this discussion (chronology and
authorship) can then be represented by standard
TEI tags and attributes, like <add> and ‘hand’.
The physical phenomenon of writing orientation
can perhaps be indicated with a <seg> element
and a ‘rend’ attribute. For the demarcation of phy-
sically distinct layers the tags <layerStart/> and
<layerEnd/> are introduced, with a ‘layer’ attribute
referring to the corresponding definition in the
header. Those elements can be given an own ‘id’,
in order to facilitate the virtual linking of these
points in the text by means of a <link/> or
<join/> element. Thus, assuming a layer definition
with id ‘‘l2’’ for the added paper in the
<profileDesc>, a suggested encoding of the example
given above looks like this:
<TEI.2>
<teiHeader>
...
<profileDesc>
<handList>
<hand id¼‘‘hand2’’/>
</handList>
<layerList>
<layer id¼‘‘l2’’ type¼‘‘post-it’’/>
</layerList>
</profileDesc>
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
. . .
<p>The next word <layerStart layer¼‘‘l2’’
id¼‘‘ls1’’/>will appear in a
distinct physical area</p>
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
92 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
8.2 Theoretical difficulties
Even with a technically satisfying solution for the
encoding of hierarchical overlaps, the correlations
of logical and physical structures need serious the-
oretical attention. For example, in this edition pro-
ject, the following occurrence of a shift of physical
layers was encountered. On 7 October 1924, Stijn
Streuvels received a printer’s proof by mail with on
the envelope a sticker which said ‘Sent back to the
post. The address was not correct or not com-
plete’.49 The next day, the author wrote an answer
to his publisher who was the sender of the proof,
stuck the label on the letter and commented on it in
the text of the letter. He wrote: ‘Yesterday morning I
received the proof and the letter by regular mail
at 8.30 a.m., and both pieces were labelled as
such-: [label] I cannot see what was wrong with
the addresses or how they were incomplete’.50
When transcribing the letter, the key question
is whether this external material is part of the
letter or not. The logical answer is yes. The author
refers to the text on this label, thus incorporating
the external object in the logical contents of the
letter. Also regarding the chronology of writing,
this object forms an organic part of the letter
with the previous and next words. It can be assumed
that Streuvels first wrote the sentence in which
he mentioned the importance of the label, then
pasted that fragment on to the letter and then con-
tinued writing the letter. Although this sounds
chronologically sound, there are some discontinu-
ous aspects involved. The text on the label predates
the moment of writing of the letter. In addition, the
author of this fragment is not Streuvels himself.
Another discontinuity is obviously situated at the
physical level.
This example does of course provoque daunting
questions about the nature of text, that should
deserve thorough theoretical investigation for
every encoding endeavour. Such theoretical issues
can be illustrated with a possible encoding for this
example, according to the minimal layer model
<p> If so desired, a new paragraph will
complicate matters, as well as a
reference to <name>Stijn <layerEnd
layer¼‘‘l2’’ id¼‘‘le1’’/>
Streuvels</name>, and a couple of new
<add hand¼‘‘hand2’’>
tri<layerStart layer¼‘‘l2’’
id¼‘‘ls1b’’/>cky!
</add> boundary crossings to make
the story <seg rend¼‘‘90’’>com
<layerEnd
layer¼‘‘l2’’
id¼‘‘le1b’’/>plete.</seg>
</p>
. . .
</body>
<back>
<join targets¼‘‘ls1 le1 ls1b le1b’’
result¼‘‘div’’ desc¼
‘‘physical layer’’/>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
<teiHeader>
. . .
<layerList>
<layer id¼‘‘l2’’ type¼‘‘label’’/>
</layerList>
. . .
</teiHeader>
<text>
<body>
<p>Gister-morgen heb ik de proef en den
brief,<ptr target¼‘‘n1’’/> om 8½u
met de <hi type¼‘‘underline’’>gewone
</hi> post ontvangen en beide stukken
met een etiket voorzien-:<layerStart
id¼‘‘l1s’’ layer¼ ‘‘l2’’/><print type¼
‘‘newspaper’’> REMIS A
LA POSTE<lb/> l’ adresse e´tant inexacte
<lb/> ou insuffisante.<lb/></print>
<layerEnd id¼‘‘l1e’’ layer¼‘‘l2’’/>
W&agrave;t er wel aan de adressen
mankeerde of te kort was, kan ik
niet raden.
...
</p>
</body>
</text>
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 93
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
presented above. When the physically distinct layer
is defined in the header, the empty elements
<layerStart/> and <layerEnd/> can refer to it
while signalling its boundaries in the text.
Regarding the logical level, the external text
cannot be tagged with <add>, as it is as much an
addition as each distinct word written by Streuvels.
However, the authorial shift for the text printed on
the sticker should be articulated. This can be done
with the <print> element with a value of ‘news-
paper’ for its @type attribute, which can also be
used when newspaper clippings etc. become part
of the letter.
9 Computing the Edition: Access
After this overview of specific markup aspects of the
DALF textbase and the efforts made to adhere to
international standards, a final observation can
point out the theoretical similarities between our
model and two converging trends in the informa-
tion sciences, aiming at making accessible archive
materials.
If letters are amongst the most important monu-
ments which the individual can leave behind, as we
cited Johan Wolfgang von Goethe at the beginning
of this paper, striving towards better access to docu-
ments is enhancing the chances for a better under-
standing of our culture. In the last decade, we
can see this striving at work, for instance, in two
concrete developments in the world of libraries,
archives, documentation centres, and museums:
the digital library and networked information man-
agement. The digital library which Deegan and
Tanner define as ‘a managed collection of digital
objects’51 can of course itself become a node in a
network, as can digital catalogues, digitized (loca-
tion) registers, etc., but it is mainly aimed to make
the digital objects52 available ‘in a cohesive manner,
supported by services necessary to allow users to
retrieve and exploit the resources just as they
would any other library materials’.53 But where the
digital library provides the user access to long-term
stable resources in the form of image, text, hypertext
or hypermedia, the managed information networks
provide the user with information about resources
which often do not live in digital form. A relevant
example of such network is the MALVINE project54
(MAnuscripts and Letters Via Integrated Networks
in Europe) which aims to ‘provide overall access
to existing item level description catalogues about
modern manuscript holdings via a search engine’.55
MALVINE enables the user to search and retrieve
descriptions of modern manuscripts and letters,
both on the collection level and on the item level,
from a heterogeneous group of libraries, archives,
documentation centres, and museums through one
location (URI) and a multilingual interface. At the
core of the integrated network lies a common
European metadata format based on EAD56/XML
with which the data from the participating institu-
tions have to comply before the search engine can
access it via Z39.50.57 The ultimate goal in the
development of MALVINE is to offer the user har-
monized access to heterogeneous databases and the
possibility to request digital images of every
document.
With respect to epistolary editing, this integra-
tion of the content oriented approach of the digital
library and the pure cataloguing interest of managed
information networks such as MALVINE has rarely
been put into practice, and could be the topic of
another paper. Therefore, more research should be
done on the function of e.g. archival descriptions in
metadata58 for both the textbase and the generated
spin off products, as well as for the integrated net-
work providing access to that material.
10 Conclusion
In order to profit from all advantages electronic
editions of modern correspondence material offer
the editor, researcher, or the wider audience,
a formal framework must be agreed on for the
description, transcription, and encoding of the doc-
umentary source material. Only from a rich textbase
of encoded correspondence material, several spin off
products can be extracted and realized, such as
scholarly editions, reading texts, indexes, catalogues,
calendars, regests, polyfunctional research corpora
etc. This formal framework should cater for both
the detailed documentation of metadata about
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
94 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the archival finding and the detailed description
(caption) of its contents. This way the resulting
textbase could integrate the functionalities of the
digital library and managed information networks
in offering the user all sorts of (user) generated
views on the material or ‘products’. In developing
such a formal framework, much effort should go to
its documentation. The resulting document, guide-
lines, guide to good practice, or technical files will
be the starting point for every debate, improvement,
or training, and will facilitate a consistent input in
the textbase and a continuous assessment of its con-
tents. DALF could be a good attempt at reaching
these goals.
Notes
All URLs last accessed 22 May 2002.
1 Kline, M.-J. (1998). A Guide to Documentary Editing.
2nd edn. Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, p. 70.
2 Eide mentions in this respect that the Norwegian
Documentation Project, which is digitizing literary
texts and editions of correspondence material, was ori-
ginally meant ‘to create a corpus to be used in the
creation of a national Norwegian literary dictionary’
[Øyvind Eide. (2003). Putting the dialogue back
together: re-creating structure in letter publishing.
Computers and the Humanities, 37(1): 67].
3 For the codicological ramifications, see Shillingsburg,
P. L. (1996). Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age:
Theory and Practice, 3rd edn. Ann Arbor: The
University of Michigan Press, p. 16. Goethe’s remark
remains a touchstone: ‘Briefe geho¨ren unter die wich-
tigsten Denkma¨ler, die der einzelne Mensch hinterlas-
sen kann’ cited in Buschmeier, G. (1999). ‘Die
Auswertung von Komponistenbriefen in deutschen
Forschungseinrichtungen’ (summary in English:
‘Evaluation of Composers’ Letters within German
Research Institutions.’) Info RISM, 10. http://rism.stu-
b.uni-frankfurt.de/–inforism/
InfoRISM_Vol_%2010.htm (accessed 22 May 2002).
4 See: Centrum voor Teksteditie en Bronnenstudie
<http://www.kantl.be/ctb/>. Koninklijke Academie
voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde <http://
www.kantl.be>. All information, encoding guidelines
and DTDs can be downloaded from the project web-
page <http://www.kantl.be/ctb/project/dalf/>. The
Royal Academy of Dutch Language and Literature
has since its founding in 1886 had an interest in
the edition of letters. The first concrete plan for an
analogue textbase of correspondence material was pro-
posed in 1948: see Schmook, G. (1949). Pleidooi voor
de uitgave van de brieven van negentiendeeuwse
Vlaamse figuren. Verslagen en Mededelingen van de
Kon. Vlaamse Academie voor Taal- en Letterkunde,
1949: 23–42.
5 Flanders, J. (1998). Trusting the electronic edition.
Computers and the Humanities, 31(4): 305.
6 Piez, W. (2001). Beyond the ‘Descriptive vs.
Procedural’ distinction. Markup Languages: Theory &
Practice, 3(2): 141.
7 ‘Markup that describes the structure and other attri-
butes of a document in a non-system-specific
manner, independently of any processing that may be
performed on it. In particular, SGML descriptive
markup uses tags to express the element structure’
[Goldfarb, C. E. (1990). The SGML Handbook.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 137 and 262].
‘Descriptive markup describes/characterizes/identifies
a text component/feature/part’; ‘procedural markup
invokes/specifies/commands a formatting/rendering
procedure/effect/process/action’ [Renear, A. (2000).
The descriptive/procedural distinction is flawed.
Markup Languages: Theory & Practice, 2(4): 412].
8 Renear, A. (2000). The descriptive/procedural distinc-
tion is flawed. Markup Languages: Theory & Practice,
2(4): 413. Mood is defined as: ‘whether markup
describes something, or requests processing,’ and
domain as ‘the sort of thing being described, or
requested’ (p. 417).
9 This example fills the empty slot in Renear’s
classification of authorial markup (Renear, p. 417,
Fig. 4).
10 We cannot say that the author/editor makes the words
into a lemma or a reading (which would mean they
were in the logical domain), for these are constructs of
the mind in the context of reading several documen-
tary sources together.
11 See in this respect the Archive/Museum model in
Vanhoutte (2000). See note 14.
12 See Dancing with DALF: Towards a Digital Archive
of Letters written by Flemish authors and
composers in the 19th and 20th century, paper
presented at the ACH/ALLC conference, New York,
13 June 2001.
13 See De Smedt, M. and Vanhoutte, E. (2000). Stijn
Streuvels. De Teleurgang van den Waterhoek:
Elektronisch-kritische editie/Electronic-critical Edition.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. For the
TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) see <http://www.tei-c.
org>.
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 95
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
14 Vanhoutte, E. (2000). Where is the Editor? Resistance
in the Creation of an Electronic Critical Edition.
In Deegan, M. Anderson, J. and Short, H. (eds),
DRH 98: Selected Papers from Digital Resources for
the Humanities 1998. London: Office for Humanities
Communication, pp. 171–83. This paper is available
online at <http://www.hb.se/bhs/ith/1-99/ev.htm>.
15 http://mep.cla.sc.edu/.
16 http://mep.cla.sc.edu/mepinfo/mep-info.html.
17 See the text at <http://mep.cla.sc.edu/mepinfo/MEP-
Docs/proptoc.htm>.
18 The ten optional elements are: <preparedBy>,
<prepDate>, <copyright>, <permissions>,
<docAuthor>, <docTitle>, <docDate>, <dateline>,
<sourceDesc>, and <idno>.
19 All citations in this paragraph taken from <http://
mep.cla.sc.edu/MepGuide.html>.
20 ‘Image Editions presenting images of original
documents together with retrieval and search tools
and supplementary material; [. . .] live Text Editions
presenting transcriptions of original documents
together with retrieval and search tools and supple-
mentary material; [. . .] combined Editions presenting
the documents in both image and live text form
together with retrieval and search tools and supple-
mentary material; [. . .] transitional Editions present-
ing page images of letterpress editions made
accessible through live indices and search engines; or
page images of typeset volumes with live transcrip-
tions of documents not published in the letterpress
volumes linked with live indices and search engines.’
21 ‘MASTER is a European Union funded project to
create a single on-line catalogue of medieval manu-
scripts in European libraries. This project has devel-
oped a single standard for computer-readable
descriptions of manuscripts. It has created software
for making these records, and tested the standard
and the software on descriptions of some 2000 manu-
scripts. Many of these records will be mounted in
a single networked catalogue, available to everyone.
MASTER is funded under the Framework IV
Telematics for Libraries call.’ Online at <http://
www.cta.dmu.ac.uk/projects/master/>. See Section 7
below for detailed information about the influence
of MASTER on DALF.
22 See Kline (1998) for a concise treatment of documen-
tary editing (see note 1).
23 See Van Hulle, D. (1999). Textual Awareness. A
Genetic Approach to the Late Works of James Joyce,
Marcel Proust, and Thomas Mann. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Antwerp; (published in 2004 by
Michigan University Press).
24 Scheibe, S. (1988). Some notes on letter editions: with
special reference to German writers. Studies in
Bibliography, 41: 137.
25 ‘[G]eschrift in de vorm van een toespraak, tot een
of meer afwezige personen gericht om hem (hen)
iets te doen weten, gesloten en van een adres voorzien
verzonden’ [Geerts, G. and Heestermans, H. (eds).
(1989). van Dale Groot Woordenboek der Nederlandse
Taal, Elfde herziene druk. Utrecht/Antwerpen: Van
Dale Lexicografie, p. 448].
26 This leads to the question whether an unsent letter still
qualifies as a letter. The edition of the correspondence
of Charles Darwin, for instance, includes all drafts,
even when it is uncertain whether a final version has
ever been sent. Cf. Burckhardt, F. (1988). Editing the
correspondence of Charles Darwin. Studies in
Bibliography, 41: 149–52.
27 In a formal DTD representation they would
be defined as attributes of the element
<written.message>.
28 Mathijsen’s complete definition: ‘A letter is a text
which is intended to maintain or establish contact
between the author and a non-anonymous person or
a number of non-anonymous persons who are con-
nected to each other and which is originally not
intended for publication. The use of a form of address
is characteristic, as is the presence of an opening and a
signature. The text is meant to be sent or given to the
one to whom it is addressed’ (‘Een brief is een tekst die
gericht is op het in stand houden of leggen van contact
tussen schrijver en een niet anoniem persoon of een
aantal niet anonieme personen die met elkaar in
betrekking staan en die in eerste instantie niet
geı¨ntendeerd is voor openbaarmaking. Gebruik van
de aanspreekvorm is kenmerkend, evenals de aanwe-
zigheid van een aanhef en een ondertekening. De tekst
is bedoeld ter verzending of overhandiging aan degene
aan wie hij gericht is’). See Mathijsen, M. (1991).
Het Dilemma van de brievenediteur. Gezelliana,
1992/1: 16.
29 Scheibe, ‘Some notes on letter editions’, 138 (see note
24); Mathijsen, ‘Het dilemma van de brievenediteur’,
16 (see note 28).
30 Sulloway, F. J. (1983). Further remarks on Darwin’s
spelling habits and the dating of beagle voyage manu-
scripts. Journal of the History of Biology, 16: 361–90;
and ‘Burckhardt (1988 see note 26), esp. 152,’ have
demonstrated the importance of Darwin’s correspon-
dence for a correct reconstruction of the chronology
of his theories.
31 The suggestion by Winfried Woesler not to include
typewritten or computer printed material in a letter
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
96 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
edition cannot be held valid any more in an era where
the computer has for a great deal replaced the pen:
‘Drucksachen, Computerbriefe, vervielfa¨ltige
Rundschreiben werden in der Regel nicht aufgenom-
men’ [Woesler, W. (1988). Vorschla¨ge fu¨r eine
Normierung von Briefeditionen. Editio, 2: 9].
32 Paradoxically it is exactly this quality of privateness
which sometimes obstructs the publication of the edi-
tion. When dealing with modern correspondence
material which is still under copyright, the estate
often uses the privateness of the letter as an argument
not to grant permission for publication or use in an
edition.
33 ‘Ein Brief ist ein Verkehrsschriftstu¨ck, das nicht zu
einem Aktenschriftstu¨ck geworden ist’[Schmid, I.
(1988). Was ist ein Brief? Zur Begriffsbestimmung
des Terminus ‘Brief’ als Bezeichnung einder quellen-
kundlichen Gattung. Editio, 2: 4].
34 ‘Bei allem u¨berlieferten Schriftgut haben wir es mit
Zeugnissen der Vergangensheit zu tun, fu¨r deren
quellenma¨ßige Nutzung es nicht unwichtig ist, aus
welchen Motiven heraus sie entstanden sind. Eines
dieser Motive ist das der Mitteilung’ [Schmid, I.
(1988). Was ist ein Brief? Zur Begriffsbestimmung
des Terminus ‘Brief’ als Bezeichnung einer quellen-
kundlichen Gattung. Editio, 2: 3].
35 ‘The ADDRESSER sends a MESSAGE to the ADDRESSEE.
To be operative the message requires a CONTEXT
referred to (‘referent’ in another, somewhat ambigu-
ous nomenclature), seizable by the addressee, and
either verbal or capable of being verbalized; a CODE
fully, or at least partially, common to the addresser
and addressee (or in other words, to the encoder and
decoder of the message); and, finally, a CONTACT, a
physical channel and psychological connection
between the addresser and the addressee, enabling
both of them to enter and stay in communication’
[Jakobson, R. (1971). Linguistics and Poetics. In
Sebeok, T. A. (ed.), Style in Language. Cambridge,
MA: M.I.T. Press, p. 353].
36 Cf. Geeraerts, D. (1989). Wat er in een woord zit.
Facetten van de lexicale semantiek. Leuven: Peeters,
pp. 130–54.
37 Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. and Burnard, L. (eds).
(2002). TEI P4 Guidelines for Electronic Text
Encoding and Interchange: XML-compatible Edition.
Oxford, Providence, Charlottesville, and Bergen:
The TEI Consortium. See also <http://www.tei-c.org/
P4X/>.
38 Chapter 18 of TEI P4 concludes with a hint at future
expansion of the TEI tagset in this respect. Perhaps
projects like MASTER or the current DALF project,
explicitly focusing on the encoding of primary manu-
script material, can contribute with insights, or with
stimulation of the public debate on this matter.
39 http://www.tei-c.org/pizza.html.
40 The only reason for not including the ‘verse’ base
tagset is that the presence of <lg> and <l> elements
in the core tagset was deemed sufficient to encode
poetry that may occur within letters.
41 http://listserv.brown.edu/archives/tei-l.html.
42 A full technical discussion can be found in Arjan
Loeffers’ answer on 28 October 1997 to Andreas
Nolda who formulated nearly the same problem we
encountered. These messages can be found in the TEI
List archive.
43 Thompson, H. S. and McKelvie, D. (1997). Hyperlink
Semantics for Standoff Markup of Read-only
Documents, Proceedings of SGML Europe ’97,
Barcelona, May 1997, online at <http://www.ltg.
ed.ac.uk/ht/sgmleu97.html>.
44 Durusau, P. and O’Donnell, M. B. (2001).
Implementing Concurrent Markup in XML. Extreme
Markup. Montreal, online at <http://www.sbl-
site2.org/Extreme2001/Concur.html>.
45 Huitfeldt, C. (1998). MECS: A Multi-Element Code
System. Online at <http://helmer.hit.uib.no/claus/
mecs/mecs.htm>. Huitfeldt, C. and Sperberg-
McQueen, C. M. (2001). TexMECS. An Experimental
Markup Meta-language for Complex Documents.
Online at <http://www.hit.uib.no/claus/mlcd/papers/
texmecs.html>.
46 See Bjørnestad, B. K. and Meurer, P. (2002). A
Computational Model for MLCD. Presentation at
AHC/ALLC. Tu¨bingen [typescript], 15.
47 Durusau, P. and O’Donnell, M. B. (2002). Concurrent
Markup for XML Documents. Presentation for ‘XML
Europe’. Online at <http://www.idealliance.org/
papers/xmle02/dx_xmle02/papers/03-03-07/03-03-
07.pdf>. See further <http://www.sbl-site2.org/
Overlap/>.
48 Durusau, P. and O’Donnell, M. B. (2002). Coming
Down From The Trees: Future of the Evolution of
Markup? Paper presented at the Extreme Markup
Languages conference, Montreal. Online at <http://
www.sbl-site2.org/Extreme2002/JITTs.ppt>.
49 ‘Remis a` la poste. L’adresse e´tant inexacte ou
insuffisante.’
50 ‘Gister-morgen heb ik de proef van den brief, om 8½
u met de gewone post ontvangen en beide stukken met
een etiket voorzien-: [label] Wa`t er wel aan de adres-
sen mankeerde of te kort was, kan ik niet raden.’
Editing modern correspondence material
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009 97
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
51 Deegan, M. and Tanner, S. (2002). Digital Futures:
Strategies for the Information Age. London: Library
Association Publishing, p. 241.
52 ‘Although a large proportion of a digital library’s col-
lection comprises materials that are born digital, such
as e-journals, internet resources, databases, and so on,
there are many resources that are not originally cre-
ated in digital form, but are digitized in order to
include them in a digital library’s collection’
[Chowdhury, G. G. and Chowdhury, S. (2003).
Introduction to Digital Libraries. London: Facet
Publishing, p. 103].
53 Deegan and Tanner, Digital Futures, p. 241 (see
note 51).
54 See http://www.malvine.org
55 Weber, J. (2002). Malvine, Leaf and Kalliope: Some
Co-operation Models. In Dongelmans, B. A.
Leerintveld and van der Weel, A. (eds), Digital Access
to Book Trade Archives: Papers of the 2001 Conference in
The Hague. Leiden: Academic Press, p. 50.
56 Encoded Archival Description, online at <http://lcwe-
b.loc.gov/ead/>.
57 ‘Z39.50’ refers to the International Standard, ISO
23950:‘Information Retrieval (Z39.50): Application
Service Definition and Protocol Specification’, and
to ANSI/NISO Z39.50. The Library of Congress is
the Maintenance Agency and Registration Authority
for both standards, which are technically identical
(though with minor editorial differences). The stan-
dard specifies a client/server-based protocol for
searching and retrieving information from remote
databases. Online at <http://www.loc.gov/z3950/
agency/>.
58 The specific (technical) problem of integrating EAD
encoded finding aids with TEI encoded transcripts and
digitized images of archival material is the concern of
the LEADERS project based at University College
London (Linking EAD to Electronically Retrievable
Sources: Online at <http://www.ucl.ac.uk/leaders-
project/>).
E. Vanhoutte and R. Van den Branden
98 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 1, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
