iTrench: A study of user reactions to
the use of information technology
in field archaeology
............................................................................................................................................................
Claire Warwick, Claire Fisher and Melissa Terras
Department of Information Studies, University College London,
London, UK
Mark Baker, Amanda Clarke, Mike Fulford, Matt Grove and
Emma O’Riordan
Department of Archaeology and School of Systems Engineering,
University of Reading, Reading, UK
Mike Rains
York Archaeological Trust, York, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
This article describes work undertaken by the VERA project to investigate how
archaeologists work with information technology (IT) on excavation sites. We
used a diary study to research the usual patterns of behaviour of archaeologists
digging the Silchester Roman town site during the summer of 2007. Although
recording had previously been undertaken using pen and paper, during the 2007
season a part of the dig was dedicated to trials of IT and archaeologists used
digital pens and paper and Nokia N800 handheld PDAs to record their work. The
goal of the trial was to see whether it was possible to record data from the dig
whilst still on site, rather than waiting until after the excavation to enter it into
the Integrated Archaeological Database (IADB) and to determine whether the
archaeologists found the new technology helpful. The digital pens were a success,
however, the N800s were not successful given the extreme conditions on site. Our
findings confirmed that it was important that technology should fit in well with
the work being undertaken rather than being used for its own sake, and should
respect established work flows. We also found that the quality of data being
entered was a recurrent concern as was the reliability of the infrastructure and
equipment.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
The goal of archaeological computing is to create
a situation where ‘the information flows seam-
lessly from excavation, through post-excavation to
publication and archive’ (Lock, 2003, p. 265).
Accordingly, this article presents research con-
ducted by the VERA project (Virtual Research
Environments for Archaeology: http://vera.rdg.
ac.uk) to identify how the use of advanced IT
can move the work flow of excavation and post-
excavation towards Lock’s seamless flow of
Correspondence:
Claire Warwick, Department
of Information Studies,
University College London,
Gower Street, London
WC1E 6BT, UK.
E-mail:
c.warwick@ucl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
211
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp006
information. Below we describe the results of a
study which aimed to investigate how archaeologists
use information technology (IT) in the context of a
field excavation. This study was undertaken by
researchers at School of Library, Archive and
Information Studies, University College London,
(which is now known as the Department of
Information Studies, UCL), who collaborate on
the project with the School of Systems
Engineering, and the Department of Archaeology,
University of Reading.
VERA is funded by the JISC Virtual Research
Environments Programme, Phase 2, (http://www.
jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/vre2.aspx) and
runs from April 2007 until March 2009. We aim
to produce a fully operational virtual research envir-
onment for the archaeological community. Our
work is based on a research excavation of part of
the large Roman town at Silchester, which aims to
trace the site’s development from its origins before
the Roman Conquest to its abandonment in the
fifth century AD (Clarke et al., 2007). This complex
urban site provides the material to populate the
research environment, utilizing the Integrated
Archaeological Data Base (IADB: http://www.iadb.
co.uk/specialist/it.htm), an online database system
for managing recording, analysis, archiving and
online publication of archaeological finds, contexts
and plans (Rains, 1995). The dig allows us to: study
the use of advanced IT in an archaeological context;
investigate the tasks carried out within archaeologi-
cal excavations; ascertain how and where technology
can be used to facilitate information flow within a
dig; and inform the designers of the IADB how it
may be adapted to allow integrated use of the tools
in the trench itself.
One of the most fundamental concerns of the
project is the issue of usability and appropriate
design of advanced IT. Numerous studies have
demonstrated that the successful uptake of IT
depends heavily on understanding users and that if
new systems do not fit into existing procedures and
routines, uptake of the new technology will be poor.
Publication after publication reaches the same
conclusion: that technology is important but
insufficient on its own for the success of ICT-
enabled projects. Again and again technology
projects fall down not because the hardware is
unstable, but because different systems’ archi-
tectures have been poorly scoped and
designed. Without good change management
and careful thought given to the people using
the systems as well as the technology itself,
ICT-enabled projects are unlikely to be
successful . . . (Jones and Williams, 2005, p. 9)
The VERA project is using the Silchester excava-
tion as a case study to: study the use of advanced IT
in an archaeological context; investigate the tasks
carried out within an excavation; ascertain how
and where technologies can be used to facilitate
information flow within a dig; and inform the
developers of the user portal how it may be adapted
to allow the integrated use of the tools in the trench
itself and for post dig analysis.
2 Research Context
The vast amounts of data produced by modern
excavations drives the demand for digital technol-
ogy and born digital data. Archaeologists were quick
to embrace IT to aid in research analysis and out-
puts (Laflin, 1982; Ross et al., 1990; Reilly and
Rahtz, 1992), and the use of IT is now central to
the manipulation and display of archaeological data
(Lock and Brown, 2000; McPherron and Dibble,
2002; Lock, 2003). However, the use of IT to aid
field archaeology is in its relative infancy due to
the physical characteristics of archaeological sites,
and the difficulties of using IT in the outdoor envir-
onment. The use of IT to aid field archaeology has
also often met with resistance from those who
believe traditional methods are more appropriate
(Backhouse, 2006).
With ever increasing amounts of data being gen-
erated by excavations, onsite databases are becom-
ing increasingly necessary, for example at the
excavations at C¸atalho¨yu¨k in Turkey (http://
www.catalhoyuk.com/database/catal/) and the site
of Terminal 5 at Heathrow airport (http://www.
framearch.co.uk/t5/), and some archaeologists have
begun to use digital data input from total stations,
PDAs, tablet PCs, digital cameras, digital callipers,
digital pens, and barcodes (McPherron and Dibble,
C. Warwick et al.
212 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
2003; Dibble et al., 2007; Eiteljorg, 1994). However,
these tend to operate peripherally to the main busi-
ness of excavation which continues to rely on pen
and paper, pencil and permatrace (Chadwick, 1997).
The use of digital technology in the field is especially
challenging, because of the hostile environment. As
Backhouse (2006) explains:
It is a well known truism that any equipment
that goes to site ends up broken. Digital cam-
eras are dropped in buckets of water, mobile
phones are buried in trial trenches, EDMs fall
off cliffs. Archaeologists, it seems, cannot be
trusted with equipments that use batteries
without breaking something—electronic
casualty rates in the field are very high.
The phrase ‘preservation by record’ is one that
reverberates through modern archaeology (Planning
Policy Guidance 16: Archaeology and planning)1
and key to this concept is the reality that it is the
archive that is analysed in post-excavation research
and not the site itself. At many sites, such as
Silchester, the paper records produced on site are
then digitized so that they can be incorporated into
the site database or final report (Andersen and
Bilde, 2000; Powesland, 1998). Frequently this
occurs only after the excavation has finished. For
many excavations, therefore, the use of IT is
restricted to the analysis stage rather than field
recording.
However, this has led to a separation between the
actual excavation and the recording and interpreta-
tion of data after it has ended. Although in reality
interpretation of finds and contexts occurs from
what Hodder (1997) calls ‘the trowel’s edge’,
he argues that the use of complex databases post-
excavation can impose a highly codified process of
data gathering on excavations, where interpretation
is separate from acquisition of data. There is also the
danger that excavations produce such a large
amount of data that archaeologists may only begin
to understand what they are working with when the
digging has finished and the interpretation has
taken place. However, ideally the use of IT on site
should allow data to be interpreted using IT soon
after acquisition and the results of this fed back to
diggers to further aid their work (Beck and Beck,
2000). This ideal state is, however, not easy to
achieve. Although efforts have been made to use
technology to integrate excavation recording and
interpretation since the late 1990s (Andrews et al.,
2000), as we shall argue, it remains difficult to
achieve even with the most up to date technology.
One of the aims of the VERA project is therefore to
investigate the use of IT within the context of a field
excavation and to ascertain if, and how, it may be
appropriated to speed up the process of data record-
ing, entry and access.
VERA also aims to develop a Virtual Research
Environment in which we may integrate not only
the collection, recording and interpretation of data,
but can also publish results and make them available
to the wider archaeological community. For exam-
ple, a recent article about Silchester was able to use a
snapshot of the IADB to allow readers to search the
data upon which the article’s conclusions were
based (Clarke et al., 2007). This kind of integration
can only truly be achieved with a fully integrated
and functional VRE. Previous projects such as
C¸atalho¨yu¨k have attempted to make some results
available via their website, but a review of this web-
site argues that what emerges is more like a digitized
version of a traditional report (Jones, 2005). A fully
functional VRE should allow us to make the kind of
linkages between different types of data and reports
on them that the review calls for, thereby allowing
users to perform their own interpretation of data
excavated on site.
3 Method
We used a diary study to gather information about
the work patterns of different archaeological roles
and the way that they are supported by both digital
and analogue technologies. The study was carried
out by the UCL team, at the Silchester dig during
the summer of 2007. Context recording at Silchester
has traditionally been undertaken using pre-printed
context sheets and ballpoint pens. During the 2007
field season a defined area of the Silchester site was
used to test the use of new technologies to support
excavation. In this area archaeologists used digital
pens and paper, (http://www.logitech.com/index.
cfm/mice_pointers/digital_pen/devices/408&cl¼us,en)
Users and information technology in field archaeology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 213
digital cameras, and Nokia N800 PDAs2 (http://
www.nokia.co.uk/A4305204). Diaries from this
area were compared with those using traditional
printed context sheets to record their work. A
detailed record of the progress of both the dig and
the study was kept on the VERA blog (http://vera.
rdg.ac.uk/blog).
Diary studies are a form of participant observa-
tion that enable researchers to understand how
people usually work. They can be used to identify
areas that might be improved by the adoption of
new working practices or technologies, and are
usually carried out in a workplace setting (O’Hara
et al., 1998). Other forms of participant observation
were used by the Revelation Project, whose mem-
bers argue that this kind of ethnological approach is
vital since:
A real understanding of fieldwork recording
systems from the perspective of those carrying
out primary data collection will enable the
design of digital systems which increase effi-
ciency, access to information and data quality
by meeting the information needs of the exca-
vators, finds and environmental processing
staff. (Cross and Crosby, forthcoming)
Diary study methods have primarily been used in
Human Computer Interaction research (for exam-
ple, Rieman, 1993; Brown et al., 2000). During diary
studies, participants are asked to keep a detailed
record of their work over a short period of time.
The participant records the activity that they are
undertaking, what technologies they are using and
any comments they have on problems or the pro-
gress of their work (Carter and Mankoff, 2005). Our
use of this method helped us to understand the
patterns of behaviour that archaeologists exhibited,
and how technology can support these behaviours.
Although they have been used in to study student
use of IT and the work of humanities scholars
(Rimmer et al., 2008), the VERA project’s use of
diaries in the first instance of the use of this
method to study field archaeology that we are
aware of.
We also obtained contextual data about partici-
pants using a simple questionnaire. This elicited
information about the diary survey participants
(role, team, and status) and their experience of
using the technology on site. A cross section of
people representing different types of work and
levels of experience were chosen. For example we
included inexperienced and experienced excavators;
members of the finds team, who process the discov-
eries made on site; those who produce plans of the
site and visitor centre staff.
The data was transcribed and anonymized. Each
diary and participant details sheet were identified by
a participant number, (e.g. P4). The data was then
analysed by two researchers to identify themes
emerging from it.
4 Findings
4.1 Demographic data
Of the 70 people asked to participate, 33 returned
completed questionnaires and diaries. Despite
explanation of the reasons for the study, some
people felt the diaries were covert attempts to
check how hard they were working. These partici-
pants who resented being studied naturally pro-
duced less detailed data than more willing
participants. There was also some feeling amongst
the students that they already had to complete too
much paperwork, so anything that was optional was
inevitably considered to be a lower priority (Figs 1
and 2).
Most people on the site were digging, either as
students or supervisors, who are professional
archaeologists. Thus the number of returned ques-
tionnaires reflected this fact, as Figures 1 and 2
demonstrate.
4.2 Previous use of information
technology
Very few of the participants (12%) had previous
experience of technology on an archaeological site
other than Silchester. Surprisingly, only 19% of the
professional archaeologists claimed to have experi-
ence of using technology on a site other than
Silchester.
There was some resistance to the use of new
technology on the excavation, especially on
the part of the more experienced archaeologists.
C. Warwick et al.
214 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
Some felt that the conditions were too hostile for
computer hardware and worried about the potential
cost of damaged equipment.
I think that a computerised version of our
paper records is a good idea, but I feel that
the environment that I work in doesn’t really
suit an electronic/computerised source. We
work in muddy and wet conditions and
expensive equipment may well be ruined.
(P17)
Several participants remained convinced than pens,
pencils and paper were the most appropriate tech-
nology for recording in the field.
Pen and paper are the staple tools for the
archaeologist—adaptable and widely avail-
able. (P32)
Easy and quick to use and not in danger of
breaking pen and paper. (P21)
4.3 Teaching
The Silchester site is run as a training excavation for
Reading students and as a Field School for inter-
ested individuals. As many of the people on site
have little or no experience of working on an
archaeological site a great deal of teaching
takes place throughout the season. Teaching is
Fig. 1 Participant roles
Diary Study - Participant Status
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Sc
ho
ol
 
pu
pi
l
Un
de
rg
ra
du
at
e
Ju
st
gr
ad
u
at
ed
Ta
u
gh
t
po
st
gr
ad
u
at
e
Ph
D 
st
u
de
n
t
Pr
of
es
si
on
al
ar
ch
ae
ol
og
is
t
Ac
ad
em
ic
Vo
lu
nt
ee
r
Status
N
um
be
r o
f p
ar
tic
ip
an
ts
Fig. 2 Status of participants
Users and information technology in field archaeology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 215
undertaken by the project team, supervisors and
assistant supervisors and occurs in both formal
and informal situations. There is also a certain
amount of peer-to-peer teaching as more experi-
enced students share their expertise.
Formal teaching on site takes the form of sched-
uled on-site talks on various aspects of archaeologi-
cal field skills and specialist areas (Introduction to
Context Recording, Using an Archaeological Matrix,
Use of Archaeological Tools, Presenting Silchester to
the Public, Science@Silchester, Recognizing and
Describing Soils in Archaeology, Roman Glass,
Roman Finds in the Wider Context etc). Talks are
delivered to small groups and are supported by
handouts. Written documentation is also produced
to support various tasks undertaken on site
(Instructions on triangulation, Guide to digitizing
plans, etc). However, the practical nature of archae-
ology and the constantly varying conditions on site
mean that much of the teaching that occurs is situa-
tional (ad hoc); this is referred to here as informal
teaching.
Some of the informal teaching involved teaching
people how to use the technology being used on site
e.g. Nokia N800, digital pens, EDM (total station).
While situational teaching has its strengths it is per-
haps not the most effective way to teach people how
to use unfamiliar technology.3 As a result some par-
ticipants felt that the way to use the technology was
insufficiently explained.
Wasn’t made clear how pens interpret what’s
written—corrections complex and time con-
suming for interpretation etc. (P9)
The students themselves found it time consuming to
learn new technology in the field.
Digi-paper took some getting used to and as a
result slowed me down. (P5)
Supervisors were concerned that new students
found it challenging enough to learn about the
archaeology without being confronted with unfami-
liar technology
Because the students are having to learn
so much about the archaeology itself, it’s
just an extra complication to have to learn
how to use digital pens, palm tops etc. (P3)
It was evident that extra training was needed espe-
cially for supervisors, so that they felt comfortable
using IT before they were required to teach its use to
the students. As a result the project ran an addi-
tional training session in the use of IT hardware
before the start of the 2008 excavation, in addition
to the usual archaeological training. It also became
evident that having on site support in the use of
technology was also vital in case of problems.
4.4 Technology for context recording
Recording is key to the excavation process and stu-
dents at Silchester learn to complete context cards,
to draw plans and sections, to take levels and to use
an EDM (total station). During the 2007 field
season a N800 Internet Tablet and digital pens
were trialled for context recording in parallel with
the more traditional pen and paper techniques.
Before the field test it was anticipated that there
might be problems using the Nokia N800 on site.
The VERA technical team were worried that the
screen would be too reflective to be seen in bright
sunlight, that the font size might be too small and
that the stylus would be too small to be comfortable
in the hand for extended use (https://vera.rdg.ac.uk/
blog/?p¼24). The diary study confirmed these
concerns.
Failing to use Nokia handheld—WiFi not
working and sunlight OTT. Suggest attach
1–2 m parasol to Nokia? (P9)
The sketch facility of the N800 proved unsatis-
factory as the quality of output was totally unaccep-
table. A questionnaire about the Nokia N800
(prepared by Emma O’Riordan from Reading
University) also generated the following comments:
The sketch function is awkward to use yet
entertaining
Not good for those with bad eyesight or wear-
ing gloves
I would use one outside if I could see the
screen but I wouldn’t sketch
The stylus was considered easier to use than the
on screen keyboard which was considered ‘fiddly’
and even the larger touchscreen setting proved
unpopular. Users predicted that the stylus would
C. Warwick et al.
216 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
become quicker to use with practice and appreciated
that the speed of editing was quick. However, there
was a general concern that the Nokia N800 was not
physically robust enough to endure the rigours of
use on site.
The digital pens/paper were reviewed by seven of
the study participants (Fig. 3).4
For the 2007 season five pens were taken to site,
four of which were used by participants and one
which was kept as a backup. Most participants
enjoyed using the digital pens; one went as far as
to describe them as ‘amazing’ (P10). Some appre-
ciated their novelty, but many found that they were
of real use in their work.
As Fig. 4 shows, participants enjoyed using the
digital pens and paper. They found it easy to enter
data, and the handwriting recognition software and
uploading data to the IADB worked well, once an
initial problem of overwriting previously loaded
records had been overcome. Sketches of contexts
were also more accurate and detailed when carried
out using the digital pen, in contrast to the sketch
function on the N800. There was some resistance
from supervisors to the use of digital pens, generally
stemming from concerns about data control (see
below) and a desire to have physical data to hand.
The way in which digital pens record data is
slightly at odds with the usual work flow patterns
Digital paper
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1 2 3 4 5
Usefulness (1 = low)
Nu
m
be
r 
o
f u
se
rs
Fig. 3 Participant ratings for the usefulness of digital pens and paper
Digital paper
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
1 2 3 4 5
Enjoyment (1 = low)
Nu
m
be
r 
o
f u
se
rs
Fig. 4 Participant ratings of digital pens and paper in terms of how enjoyable they were to use
Users and information technology in field archaeology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 217
of archaeologists. When data is recorded on tradi-
tional context sheets it is entered as it becomes
available and sheets are kept until they are deemed
to be completed. Amendments are made to the sheet
as needed and the final sheet is often covered in
scribbled amendments which are then sorted out
at the data entry stage. Fields may not necessarily
be filled out in order, and some might be left blank
temporarily until more excavation has been done.
Unfortunately it was uneconomic to have digital
context sheets printed, so participants had to copy
data in linear form into digital notebooks, and iden-
tify it with the database codes of individual fields. It
was often difficult for diggers to remember what
numeric codes referred to, so copies of context
sheets were pasted into the front of the books.
The digital paper is a great idea but more time
consuming and less quality controlled because
you are having to write down all the data
headings as well as your information. (P22)
Digital books also do not allow the user to leave
gaps to fill in later, so there is a possibility that some
contexts may become spread over more than one
digital book, especially if alterations had been
made. There is also a danger that amendments to
contexts already in the database might be missed if
they were made at a later date. Pre-printed context
sheets would suffer from some of the same problems
as the digital books as they are designed to be filled
in order, a practice most uncommon in field
archaeology.
4.5 Planning and technology
Plans and sections of the site are traditionally drawn
using permatrace (waterproof translucent plastic
film) and pencil. Later plans are digitized using a
standard graphics digitizing tablet and, in the case of
Silchester, input into the IADB. As part of a pre-
vious phase of the research at Silchester, tablet PCs
were used to draw plans in an effort to eliminate the
time-consuming process of digitizing plans. The
trial proved unsuccessful and during the 2007
season plans and sections were again drawn on per-
matrace. Plan drawing can be a time-consuming
process that some archaeologists find frustrating
[one participant (P15) was keen to have ‘a machine
that automatically draws plans for you’]but perma-
trace is a robust medium that is also easy to use.
Plus pencils and permatrace work in the rain,
so we can keep on doing archaeology. (P29)
Thus in the hostile conditions of an excavation it
appears that at present old technology and tradi-
tional methods are the most effective when planning
is required.
4.6 Finds
The finds team was represented in the diary study by
two supervisors and two trainees. Previous attempts
had been made to use IT for finds processing,
but without conducting a user survey first.
Unfortunately the experiment had not been a suc-
cess, and this had left the team wary of IT. As a
result they shared the perfectly reasonable view
that technology should only be used where it was
necessary. Thus there was great support for digital
cameras, but little enthusiasm for trialling any
further technology.
A digital camera is essential for recording
finds as often their original appearance can
change as they dry out. Pen and paper—essen-
tial tool for finds. This allows for changes and
withstands the mud/water and dirt that comes
into the finds hut. (P17)
Finds are initially recorded in the field by the
excavator and the nature of this recording varies
with the nature of the find. They then pass to the
finds hut where they are processed. The supervisors/
assistant supervisors on the finds team supervise
and teach the students that are rostered to work in
finds. Processing includes being washing, sorting,
identification, marking, recording and boxing-up.
The processing produces its own data and this is
currently recorded as a paper record. The processing
also involves checking against existing records.
Identification of finds commonly involves checking
them against other sources of data such as reference
books, the internet or discussion with other
archaeologists.
Went to use computer to see if I could learn
anything there but ran into an ex-supervisor
C. Warwick et al.
218 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
who had studied burials and got info from
him. (P8)
The finds team also use an offsite network of
supporting specialists who are contacted in a variety
of (unspecified) ways. There is potential here for the
application of technology such as video conferen-
cing, skypeing, however, problems were caused by a
lack of availability of the internet on site (see dis-
cussion of reliability below). Following the problems
with the Nokia N800 in the trench, it has been
suggested that these might in future years be used
by the finds team for just such access to external
experts.
Another very important issue for the finds team
was the ownership and control of their data. It is
imperative that the finds records are easily accessible
as the finds team are frequently called upon to put
together groups of object for talks, photography,
VIP visits etc. The team therefore need to know
that information is correct and easily accessible,
and at present this is more easily done from paper
records than from a database, when internet con-
nections are unreliable and computers scarce.
4.7 Small finds
Small finds are those which are relatively rare, such
as coins or brooches. At Silchester they are recorded
in three dimensions and an EDM or total station is
generally used for this task. The use of EDMs makes
3D recording very quick and (when used correctly)
accurate but it is challenging to maintain the link
between co-ordinates, object and small finds
number throughout subsequent processing and ana-
lysis (Eiteljorg, 1994). There may be some potential
to use technology at this stage to minimize mislabel-
ling or transcription errors (see Dibble et al., 2007
on the use of barcodes on archaeological projects).
EDMs are standard equipment on the majority of
modern excavations and their usefulness was not
investigated in this study. However, they are large
and relatively expensive, which precludes having a
large number on site and there may be more
demand to use them than it is possible to supply
as this quotation demonstrates:
Showing a participant how to do the full pro-
cess of small find inc 3D co-ords (with tapes,
EDM queue too long) and photo. (P9) (our
emphasis)
4.8 Science
The science team was represented in the diary
study by two participants involve with XRF
sampling (X-ray Fluorescence, used for elemental
analysis of artefacts) and one participant
involved with environmental sampling. Both types
of sampling generate their own recording which
at present is done using pen and paper. One
of the participants (P2) involved with XRF
sampling recorded making a data spreadsheet to
fill in on site.
Environmental samples are initially recorded
in the field by the archaeologist who takes them
and then they are passed to the environmental
hut where they are processed. This processing
includes flotation, sieving, sorting and, of course,
further recording. The processing is carried out
by supervisors/assistant supervisors and the
students that are rostered to assist. The nature of
the work involved with processing the envi-
ronmental samples means that there is a lot of
water and mud around. At present recording is
in the form of a paper record and labelling is
done using waterproof pens. The participant sug-
gested that the current recording procedure was
the most appropriate one given the working
environment.
Pen and paper is used all the time in environ-
mental, for filling in the register to sample
forms. I would say that it is uneconomical
for any higher technologies, for example
adding into the database as we go, as it
would be used infrequently compared with
other sections of the site. (P20)
Apart from pens going missing it is the easiest
and quickest way to record what we do in
environmental. (P20)
There is potential for using digital pens and
paper for recording samples and it would be inter-
esting to consider using barcodes for environmental
samples.
Users and information technology in field archaeology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 219
5 Discussion
As we have seen, studies of diarists on different parts
of the site brought to light different views on the use
of IT. In some areas, such as the trench, participants
found digital pens helpful, but were disappointed
with the Nokia N800s. In others such as environ-
mental archaeology and planning the conditions
mean that at present traditional pen and paper
recording are most appropriate. It is vital to stress
that the aim of the VERA project was not to impose
the use of IT upon archaeologists, but to determine
the ideal technology for any given activity, and thus
such findings are neither surprising nor dis-
appointing.
The diaries also brought to light some overarch-
ing issues concerning the use of digital recording
and IT in field archaeology which we discuss below.
5.1 Data quality
Silchester is the largest urban excavation currently
ongoing in the UK and as such produces a huge
quantity of data. With so many people lacking pre-
vious experience it is of paramount importance that
supervisors are able to monitor the quality of the
data being recorded. Students are required to have
their context cards, plans and sections checked by a
supervisor and this system has worked effectively for
numerous years. The digital books created some
anxiety for supervisors for a number of reasons
and as a result students were asked to complete
both traditional context cards and the digital
book. Unlike the printed context sheets students
are required to write all the field names into the
digital books and although guide sheets were pro-
vided supervisors worried that some fields might be
missed out.
Digital paper—interesting technology and
works in itself but lack of printed categories
makes it VERY unsuitable for use within this
environment as checking each update is infea-
sible Technology has potential to be useful in
a situation where recording is being done by
one person or by someone who is more famil-
iar with the recording system. (P30)
Supervisors were also concerned about their con-
trol over the data quality, particularly as students
often omitted to get the digital books checked,
despite there being a system in place in the trench.
Often the realization that a context had not been
recorded as checked only came to light at the digital
pen input stage.
Also say that plans were automatically and
immediately transferred to computer, how
can supervisors check them? I don’t know if
that’s how it will work but it’s just a thought.
(P3)
There was also some concern that students using
the digital books would learn the codes for fields in
the IADB without really understanding the archae-
ology behind it. Not learning to complete typical
context sheets might also leave students unprepared
for working on other archaeological sites.
The issue of data reliability is a crucial one in
archaeology. In subsequent interviews with users
of the IADB we encountered repeated concerns
about the quality of the data itself. Interviewees
stressed that it was vital that they were able to
trust the information upon which they were
basing their interpretations, and that one of the
few drawbacks of the IADB for a user was occasion-
ally poor quality data. The technology alone was of
little value if there was any doubt about the infor-
mation contained within it. It is of course, possible
for data entered by hand onto a printed context card
to be of poor quality, and this problem is not caused
by the use of IT, but if the use of digital paper makes
it harder to check the accuracy of recording then
there is an immediate threat to data integrity.
It has therefore become evident that checking
mechanisms that ensure data quality are vital, and
that IT use must work within these established rou-
tines. Thus in future years it is evident that we need
to undertake further research about how to inte-
grate the use of digital recording into digging activ-
ities with the smallest possible disruption to data
verification routines.
5.2 Reliability
The reliability of any technology is obviously of
great importance but perhaps never more so than
C. Warwick et al.
220 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
in a field situation. Silchester itself is located within
easy reach of various amenities but many archaeo-
logical excavations must rely entirely on the equip-
ment they take with them. For scholars who are
used to working in an office or even at home,
with good internet connectivity and easy access to
computers and power to run them, it can be hard
to imagine how difficult it can be to gain access to
basic IT infrastructure. At Silchester electricity for
the entire dig had to be provided by a small gen-
erator, which consequently suffered repeated prob-
lems from being overloaded (https://vera.rdg.ac.uk/
blog/?p¼91). Thus, any computers used on site
added to the power drain, and since most diggers
camp on site there was little opportunity to recharge
laptops. Internet access was provided by WiFi.
However, the router was situated in a barn several
hundred metres away from the trench (https://vera.
rdg.ac.uk/blog/?p¼373) and there were numerous
problems with the signal (https://vera.rdg.ac.uk/
blog/?p¼40). This tended to make internet access
slow and unreliable. This means in infrastructural
terms alone the use of IT on such a dig is likely to be
fraught with difficulty.
However, despite their awareness of the difficulty
of conditions, participants therefore expressed frus-
tration at the site infrastructure, specifically the
unreliability of computers and the WiFi internet.
These are technologies that participants are used
to using off site so assessments of them are likely
to be particularly harsh if they fail to come up to
standard.
Pen and paper is always trustworthy, as the
desktop computers are slow or crash—hence
the ‘3’ rating. The internet resources are great
and I can use them often. (P7)
Computers onsite are slow. Also internet does
not stretch to finds hut and we are not sup-
plied with a generator to run any computer
we are provided with. (P28)
This is significant, since frustration with the
existing technology tended to predispose partici-
pants to mistrust suggestions of introducing new
technologies. This demonstrates that even infra-
structural issues, which in most environments are
largely taken for granted, may have a significant
impact of the trust that users have for IT and thus
is consequent uptake in field archaeology. As a
result of this realization, the VERA technical team
at Reading have made continual efforts to improve
the reliability of the kit and to increase its capacity.
Indeed one of their major recommendations for
future years was the need for a much larger genera-
tor. Similar, relatively simple solutions to such pro-
blems might also be addressed by providing more IT
kit, such as more digital pens, laptops and ideally
more powerful WiFi.
5.3 Costs and pragmatics
Within our larger observations, it is also important
to stress that when asked about the use of IT the
archaeologists were talking about an ideal situation,
which unfortunately seldom exists, especially in
terms of the costs of excavations. Thus some of
the decisions taken reflect the costs of running
such a huge dig. In an ideal world, for example,
we might have liked to give each digger his or
her own digital pen and context card on digital
paper, but the cost of this would have been
prohibitive.
It is also important to consider costs in terms of
time, which must be weighed against the concerns
expressed above about data quality. One of the main
reasons for using IT for context recording at
Silchester was to allow data to be entered more
quickly than in previous years. The previous situa-
tion meant that scholars could not start working on
the data from that year’s dig until several months
after the excavation had finished, since data was
being manually copied from written context records
to the database. Thus there is a huge saving in terms
of time if records can be entered on site. Once again
the choice of IT may emerge as the good enough
solution, which if not perfect in the eyes of its users
will allow enough data to be entered at an acceptable
level of quality for it to be useful by archaeologists
working on the Silchester data. These are not easy
decisions to make, and it is evident that the data we
have gathered must be weighed against questions of
cost in both time and money when decisions about
the use of IT on site are taken.
Users and information technology in field archaeology
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 221
6 Conclusion
If new technologies to be accepted they need to fit
within established work patterns and to fulfil a per-
ceived need. However, the introduction of new tech-
nologies must be carefully managed and supported
lest they alienate the very people they are supposed
to be helping. As a result we conducted a diary study
to identify the work patterns on the dig, and inves-
tigated the way that technology was used, and its
perceived successes and remaining problems. It
was also vital that we did not adopt a mindlessly
promotional attitude, or were seen as championing
technology for its own sake. So for example it was
important to acknowledge that the limitations of the
Nokia N800s made them unsuitable for use in the
trench. In some areas we may also conclude that at
present traditional methods are most appropriate,
but the trials of digital pens suggest that they may
be helpful in enabling data to be collected more
effectively and recorded more quickly. It was also
evident that many of the archaeologists enjoyed
using them, which is likely to help with their inte-
gration into the work of the site.
It has also become evident that IT must fit in well
with established patterns of work. The quality of the
archive is also of paramount importance for any
further work and the diary study illustrated the
importance of maintaining existing mechanisms
for checking and controlling data. In the existing
paper systems students are required to have their
context cards, plans and sections checked by a
supervisor and this system has worked effectively
for numerous years. During the 2007 field season
the quality control applied to the paper record did
not always operate with the same rigour for the
digital books and this created some anxiety for
supervisors. This is an issue that we shall need to
be aware of in future digging seasons.
The reliability of any technology is of great
importance in a field situation. Many archaeological
excavations are on much more remote sites than
Silchester and archaeologists must rely entirely on
the equipment they take with them. Participants in
the diary study expressed frustration at the site
infrastructure, specifically the unreliability of com-
puters and the WiFi internet. These are technologies
that participants are used to using off site so assess-
ments of them are likely to be particularly harsh if
they fail to come up to standard.
We may therefore conclude that it is possible to
use IT in some aspects of field archaeology, where
appropriate. Due attention must also be paid to
issue of data quality, the reliability of technology
and to established work flows. However, the seam-
less integration of data recording analysis and feed-
back to those on site remains a challenging problem
that is yet to be solved. We hope that the VERA
project will be able to make some contribution
towards the achievement of this goal.
