A chronometric approach to
Indian alchemical literature
............................................................................................................................................................
Oliver Hellwig
Institut fu¨r Sprachen und Kulturen Su¨dasiens,
Freie Universita¨t, Berlin
........................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Indian alchemy, a branch of traditional Indian medicine (A¯yurveda), has pro-
duced a corpus of texts that are difficult to date using regular philological tech-
niques. This article describes a contents-based computational method that is
capable of calculating the relative chronology of these texts. Central parts of
alchemical literature are encoded in a language model that can be understood
by a computer and then compared with an alignment algorithm. Phylogenetic
trees derived from these alignments show regularities in the ordering of alchem-
ical texts, and these may be interpreted as temporal patterns. Processing these
patterns with a minimization algorithm, we are able to compute a relative chron-
ology of the corpus, which is largely consistent with results obtained using tradi-
tional philological techniques.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
Despite 200 years of philological research, the
chronology of classical Indian literature is still full
of uncertainties.1 A particularly problematic area is
a large bulk of metrical texts that can roughly be
assigned to a ‘medieval’ period of literary produc-
tion (500–1500 AD).2 These texts come from fields
such as religious, narrative or, as in our case, scien-
tific literature. Nevertheless, they have two impor-
tant traits in common: (1) most of these texts share
a religious and sociological background that reflects
mature Hinduism and (2) the texts are written
in easy, unpolished Sanskrit, which had already
become a ‘dead language’ only used by literati.
Dating texts from this medieval period is compli-
cated by several factors. Most importantly, these
texts are (in most cases) not dated or attributable
to (non-legendary) authors. Although Indian wri-
ters were highly interested in the tradition (samq pra-
da¯ya), in which a text was handed down, they did
not care about the absolute chronology of these
traditions (Gerow, 1977, 217–219). Therefore,
dating Sanskrit texts may be seen as a genuinely
Western approach to Indian literature, which is
not supported by the inherent structure of this lit-
erary tradition. In addition, most manuscripts are
only a few hundred years old, while the texts may,
for instance, have been composed in the seventh or
eighth century. Therefore, dated manuscripts can
only serve as an approximation for the terminus
ante quem of a text. Finally, texts are often compiled
from different sources, and this makes them a mix-
ture of heterogeneous elements that are difficult to
separate.
If we want to date texts from this class of litera-
ture using chronometric methods, two restrictions
apply. First, we do not have reliably dated texts to
compare an undated text with. The same holds true
for strategies such as authorship attribution.
Correspondence:
Oliver Hellwig
Institut fu¨r Sprachen und
Kulturen Su¨dasiens,
Freie Universita¨t,
Koenigin-Luise-Strasse 34a,
D-14195 Berlin, Germany.
E-mail:
hellwig7@gmx.de
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
373
doi:10.1093/llc/fqn043 Advance Access published on 8 January 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Since the concept of (non-legendary) authorship is
almost absent from this class of texts, disputed
works cannot be assigned to the uvre of a
known writer. As datable reference points are
almost totally absent, chronometric studies of med-
ieval Indian literature must focus on heterogeneity,
or developments discernible at different levels of a
text. The second restriction concerns the accuracy of
datings found with chronometric methods. In many
cases, traditional philological datings of a single
Sanskrit text differ by hundreds of years. The case
of S´A¯RMq GADHARASAMq HITA¯ (sketched as in section 4) is
a good, but not exceptional example of these con-
troversies in Indian philology. Therefore, if it is pos-
sible to establish a relative chronology of the
alchemical corpus using a chronometric method,
this would be a considerable advance when com-
pared to philological research, which is often
based on limited sets of features and subjective con-
clusions drawn from these features.
The chronometric method proposed in this arti-
cle differs from other computational approaches
in two respects. First, the method is based on the
hypothesis that the content of a well-defined group
of texts changes with time in a similar way to the
linguistic features of those texts. Differences in con-
tent are therefore interpreted as differences in time.
Second, many studies use tests such as 2
(Trautmann, 1971) or (non-parametric)
MANOVA (Tse et al., 1998) clustering strategies
[Hoover, 2002], or data reduction techniques,
such as principal component analysis (Burrows,
1992) to detect homogeneity in texts. Apart from
the fact that results using these techniques are
often quite hard to interpret,3 these methods are
not suited to detect heterogeneity in alchemical
text-content for two practical reasons. First, any
kind of multivariate method needs input vectors
of the same (high) dimension. As will become
apparent later, such feature vectors cannot be
extracted from the encoded content of alchemical
texts. Second, most of these methods rely on
rather strict statistical requirements, such as a multi-
variate normal distribution of features. Since con-
tents analysis of Indian alchemical procedures is
usually performed on a very small number of sam-
ples, these requirements are not fulfilled in
most cases. Therefore, we propose a combination
of bioinformatic algorithms, simple non-parametric
tests, and minimization strategies in order to detect
heterogeneity in alchemical texts.
In the first step, certain groups of alchemical
instructions, the so-called ‘basic procedures’ found
in almost any text of the alchemical corpus, are
encoded with a simple language model. This results
in a database of computer-understandable alchem-
ical procedures, which currently contains over 1.200
procedures. If we want to be able to detect changes
in content, the content has to be compared. This is
the main issue of the next step. Encoded procedures
of one thematic group are compared with an algo-
rithm originally developed for the alignment of
genetic sequences. As a by-product of this align-
ment, trees are generated that describe the temporal
distribution of a group of alchemical instructions
under certain mathematical conditions. From the
layout of these trees, time rules are derived, which
store regular patterns in the temporal distribution of
texts. In a final step, statistically significant time
rules are processed with a minimization algorithm
that calculates the relative chronology of the
alchemical corpus.
The rest of the article is organized as follows:
Section 1 introduces the language model that
encodes the alchemical texts. The following section
describes how encoded alchemical procedures are
compared with an alignment algorithm. In Section
3, we discuss the derivation of ‘time rules’ from
alignments. Finally, in Section 4, we present a mini-
mization algorithm, which transforms time rules
into a stratification of the alchemical corpus.
1 Encoding Alchemical Texts
Indian alchemy arises from a group of about twenty
important works written in regular, easy Sanskrit
verses.4 It flourished from 900 AD to 1600 AD,
although alchemical treatises continued to be pro-
duced until the beginning of the twentieth century.5
The Indian alchemical tradition has two main objec-
tives: (1) the production of precious metals, espe-
cially of gold, and (2) the perfection of the human
body. In order to achieve these aims, alchemical
O. Hellwig
374 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
texts list a large number of experiments or proce-
dures, which may be divided into basic and
advanced procedures. The advanced procedures
deal with the two main objectives of Indian
alchemy, the transformation of base metals and
of the fragile human body. Since many texts
focus either on metallurgy or on body optimiza-
tion, advanced procedures are quite unequally
distributed over the alchemical literature.
However, almost any alchemical text mentions
the experiments which may be termed as ‘basic pro-
cedures’. They describe fundamental operations
performed with mineral substances used in Indian
alchemy, e.g. the purification (s´odhana) and ‘oxida-
tion’ (ma¯rana) of these minerals, or the extraction
of their ‘essences’ (sattvapa¯tana). Minerals prepared
in this way can later be used in the advanced
procedures, however, as mentioned above, this
topic is not covered equally by all alchemical texts.
If we want to deduce age from changes in content,
the first way to do this would be to compare
basic procedures.
Basic procedures can be distinguished through
two criteria: (1) the processed mineral (e.g. mer-
cury) and (2) the type of procedure itself (e.g. pur-
ification). Grouping the procedures with these
criteria, we get about ninety thematic groups
labelled, for instance, ‘purification of mercury’
or ‘oxidation of copper’. Each procedure is then
manually encoded in a simple time-linear language
model, which has been developed for this project.6
This model is derived from the verb-valence-model
of linguistics, and each procedure is interpreted as a
sequence of verbal phrases, i.e. verbs which are spe-
cified by their necessary valences (mainly actor,
object, and instrument) and modifiers (mainly
place). Concepts used in this language model are
stored in a hierarchical ontology that combines
the ideas of semantic nets (Quillian, 1986) and
frames (Minsky, 1975). The following line
from the BHA¯VAPRA¯KA¯S´A, a late text containing
alchemical passages is used as an example (BhPr,
2, 3, 62):
dhrtva¯ tadgolakamq bha¯nq dq e s´ara¯venq a ca rod-
hayet// ‘(The alchemist) puts this ball (made
of different ingredients) in a vessel and closes
it with a s´ara¯va (a kind of lid).’
The content of the line is split into two instructions
(putting the ball in the vessel; closing this vessel with
the lid) and then encoded as shown in Fig. 1.
2 Comparing Alchemical
Procedures
To detect changes in one thematic group, we have
to compare the procedures that the group contains.
Sequence alignment, a technique from bioinfor-
matics, is an adequate tool for such a comparison.
Sequences of verbal phrases can be interpreted as
symbol sequences. The aim is to align procedures,
or the symbol sequences of one thematic group in
such a way that as many similar or identical symbols
(i.e. verbal phrases) as possible can be written ‘one
under the other’, and as few gaps as possible have to
be inserted. An example may clarify this method.
Figure 2 shows three procedures describing the pur-
ification of sulphur.7 The procedures are built from
a small set of symbols consisting of the verbal
phrases ‘melt . . .’ ¼ A, ‘filter . . .’ ¼ B, and ‘pour
. . .’ ¼C. Therefore, they can be rewritten in the
form
p1 A B C
p2 A C
p3 B C
and aligned as
p1 A B C
p2 A  C
p3  B C
This kind of alignment can, for example, be per-
formed with the Needleman-Wunsch algorithm
(Needleman and Wunsch, 1970), which is based
on the same idea as the well-known Levenshtein
algorithm for string comparison. To align sequences
of verbal phrases which are more complicated than
Fig. 1 Encoding the line BHPR, 2, 3, 62.2. Entities marked
with ‘asterick’ are supplemented from the context
Chronometric approach to alchemical literature
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 375
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
in this example, the alignment algorithm has to
be modified in one important aspect. The source
algorithm operates with a very small alphabet of
symbols, and penalties for all symbol pairs can be
pre-computed (Needleman and Wunsch, 1970,
p. 447), whereas the alphabet of alchemical verbal
phrases is unlimited. Calculating with pre-com-
puted penalties unduly simplifies the comparison
of similar verbal phrases. However, if we use dis-
tance information derived from the structure of the
hierarchical ontology, similar verbal phrases can be
compared at the time of running the program. Con-
sidering an example with two sample phrases ‘he
mixes sulphur and mercury’ and ‘he mixes borax
and mercury’, the concepts ‘sulphur’ and ‘borax’
are both children of the parent concept ‘inorganic
substance’ ! ‘non-metal’, and therefore have a very
small ‘ontological distance’ (see Fig. 3). Generally
speaking, in the modified Needleman–Wunsch
algorithm, two symbols, or verbal phrases can be
compared and also combined, if at least their
verbal components are identical. In this way, the
rather strict penalty function of the source algo-
rithm is replaced by a variable similarity value ran-
ging continuously from 0 (no similarities) to 1
(identical).
3 Deriving Time Rules
When more than two procedures are compared, the
exact alignment algorithm soon becomes too com-
putationally expensive. An easy heuristic solution for
this problem first groups sequences into clusters, and
then derives the order of alignment from this cluster-
ing (Thompson et al., 1994). More specifically, align-
ments of all possible pairs of procedures are first
calculated with the exact algorithm described in the
last section. The pairwise distances resulting from the
modified Needleman–Wunsch alignment are stored
in a symmetric distance matrix, from which a hier-
archical tree is computed. This ‘guide tree’ describes
Fig. 2 Three procedures for purification of sulphur (‘ghee’ is a kind of butter)
Fig. 3 Extract from a possible hierarchical ontology for alchemical texts
O. Hellwig
376 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the order in which to perform the actual alignment.
Contrary to the approach in Thompson et al. (1994),
the guide tree is constructed with the UPGMA
(Sokal and Michener, 1958), and not the
Neighbour-Joining method. This results in a rooted
tree that supplies the source information for the
dating of alchemical texts. If the matrix of pairwise
distances, from which this tree is constructed, is
ultrametric,8 the tree can be interpreted as a phylo-
genetic tree of one thematic group. The arrangement
of elements in such a tree indicates their temporal
relations. Elements branching off this tree at nodes
that are closer to its root are earlier than those
branching off later. From a biological point of view,
UPGMA is motivated by the partly obsolete theory
that successful mutations in a population occur
with a constant rate (‘molecular clock property’). If
alchemical procedures also ‘mutate’ with an approxi-
mately constant rate, the clustering tree constructed
with UPGMA may be used to date procedures or the
texts that contain these procedures. Assuming a con-
stant rate of mutation, of course, grossly simplifies
the complicated process of text production and
transmission. Scientific development may proceed
in a non-linear way, thereby, invalidating the basic
assumption of this method. In addition, the texts of
Indian alchemy are interconnected by a dense net-
work of citations and (from a European perspective)
plagiarism. Two texts describing similar alchemical
procedures need not be contemporary, but may cite
or even, as Bendixen has put it in the case of RRS and
RCu¯M (Bendixen, 1990), re-edit each other. Tradi-
tional philology, however, has based the chronology
of Indian alchemy on the same foundation as this
computational method: when the alchemical tradi-
tion is examined as a whole, differences of content
become apparent, which can be interpreted as time
markers. In this system, early alchemy deals with
metallurgy, while late texts combine alchemical and
a¯yurvedic teachings. The dates of texts showing fea-
tures from both classes can only be estimated (cf.
Ray, 1956, p. 98, White, 1996, p. 78–170). Therefore,
the computational method proposed in this article
may be seen as a reinterpretation of a typical
philological technique, which, however, tries to
replace the fuzziness of personal impressions by a
(perhaps too) strict formalism.
When this theoretical model is applied to real
alchemical data, two important restrictions have to
be made. The first and most serious restriction is the
fact that phylogenetical methods in biology compare
the genetic material of contemporary taxa. This con-
dition is also expressed in the claim that distances
from the root to each leaf must be identical in a
phylogenetic tree. Contrary to this claim, it cannot
be guaranteed that each alchemical text is a ‘con-
temporary taxon’. Some of the editions may pre-
serve the state of a text from hundreds of years
ago, while others may offer a recent version.
Second, distance matrices for a group of procedures
are very often far from ultrametric. Trees con-
structed from such matrices cannot be expected to
represent the temporal relationship of the proce-
dures/texts correctly. A practical way of working
around this problem is based on the observation
that in many cases procedures collected in one the-
matic group (such as ‘purification of mercury’) are
obviously alternatives, and are therefore not ‘phylo-
genetically’ related to each other. One of the numer-
ous examples for this claim is the purification of
copper, for which two sub-groups, G1 and G2, can
be distinguished (Fig. 4). In the first sub-group G1,
copper is smeared with plant extracts and salts,
heated and dipped into plant juices. In G2, the
metal is cooked in cow’s urine. The claim that
sub-groups are alternatives and therefore not
derived from a common ancestor is supported by
the fact that many texts mention procedures which
belong to several subgroups (in the case of copper,
procedures from both sub-groups G1 and G2 are, for
instance, listed in RRS and RCINT). A look at the
guide tree in Fig. 4 shows that both sub-groups G1
and G2 are concentrated in well-definable sub-trees.
The sub-matrices of pairwise distances correspond-
ing to these sub-trees are in most cases at least
approximately ultrametric.10 Therefore, temporal
relationships deduced from coherent sub-trees can
be expected to contain less errors than those
deduced from the complete tree of a thematic
group.
To obtain an impression of how procedures are
ordered in sub-groups, Fig. 5 shows the alignment
of G2 in a structural diagram. Items printed in bold
are referenced in all procedures of G2, otherwise the
Chronometric approach to alchemical literature
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 377
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
number(s) of the procedure(s) that contain these
items are printed right after an item (e.g.
‘[copper] [5]’ ¼ copper is mentioned in procedure
5).11 If we compare this diagram with the sub-tree
G2 in Fig. 4, we can view the relationship between
changes in the procedure and the order in the tree.
Three texts (RMAN˜J, RRS, and RRA¯) describe exactly
the same procedure (copper and cow’s urine are
heated on a fire). The RCINT adds sour juice and
alkaline substances to the mixture, and therefore
follows in a small (temporal) distance. Finally, the
RSK adds a second step to the procedure, and
is therefore placed farthest away from the group
{2, 3, 4} in the guide tree:
About 120 sub-groups can be extracted from the
alignment trees of thematic (sub)groups contained
in the alchemy database. As mentioned above, the
position of the procedures or texts is strongly influ-
enced by ultrametric properties of the respective
(sub)matrix. Since the (sub)matrices are not per-
fectly ultrametric in most cases and the basic
requirement of a constant rate of mutation may
be violated, the guide trees are not directly trans-
formed into date informations. Instead, we look for
statistically significant patterns in the placement of
texts in these trees. To find these patterns, we
extract two kinds of ‘time rules’ from (sub)trees.
The first kind of rule records how often two texts
follow each other in a guide tree [order rule (OR)].
For example, the rule RARN<RRS¼ 10:2 means that
the RARN precedes the RRS in 10 of 10þ2¼12 cases.
The second kind of rule stores the distance between
text pairs as given by the distance of their respective
clusters calculated with UPGMA The distance of
a text pair is assigned to one of three bins (‘small’,
‘medium’ and ‘large’ temporal distance). This
results in distance rules (DR) such as RARN<>RRS
¼ 2:5:40: the pair RARN and RRS is found in forty-
seven (sub)trees, and they have a small temporal
distance in only two of the forty-seven cases.
Next, these rules are examined by using the
binomial (OR) and multinomial (DR) test, with
significance assigned at the 10% level. Rules
which are not statistically significant at this level
are discarded, and statistically significant
distance rules are transformed into average dis-
tances. A group of external chronological restric-
tions that can be deduced from manuscript
tradition and citations is added to the significant
rules (Tables 1 and 2).
Fig. 4 Guide tree for clustering the thematic group ‘pur-
ification of copper’—References: 1: BHPR, 2, 3, 55–56;
2:RARNq , 12, 138–139; 3: RARNq , 17, 95–97; 4: RCINT, 6,
10; 5: RCINT, 6, 11; 6: RCU¯M, 14, 45–46; 7: RCU¯M, 14,
46–47; 8: RCU¯M, 14, 47–48; 9: RCU¯M, 14, 48–56; 10:
RHT, 9, 13; 11: RMAN˜J, 5, 26–27; 12: RMAN˜J, 5, 28; 13:
RRS, 5, 49; 14: RRS, 5, 50; 15: RRS, 5, 51; 16: RRS, 5, 52;
17: RRA¯, R.kh., 8, 47–49; 18: RRA¯, R.kh., 8, 50; 19: RRA¯,
V.kh., 3, 106–107; 20: RSK, 2, 18; and 21: RRS, 1, 270–271
Fig. 5 Alignment of the procedures from the sub-group
‘purification of copper, G2’—References: 1: RCINT, 6,
11.1–2; 2: RMAN˜J, 5, 28.1–2; 3: RRS, 5, 52.1–2; 4: RRA¯,
R.kh., 8, 50.1–2; and 5: RSK, 2, 18.1–2
O. Hellwig
378 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4 Dating the Alchemical Corpus
In the final step, time rules listed in Tables 1 and 2
are used to derive a relative chronology of the
alchemical corpus. We use a technique that is moti-
vated by multi-dimensional scaling. The texts have
to be placed on a (one-dimensional) timeline in
such a way that as many time rules as possible are
fulfilled. In the beginning, each text is assigned to a
random position (i.e. dating) that lies inside the
global time frame of Indian alchemy (900–1600
AD).12 The goodness S of a single constellation of
all texts on the timeline is calculated as follows. All
texts Ti (dating: di) and their associated time rules
are inspected one after another. If a time rule is
fulfilled, nothing is added to S. Otherwise, a penalty
 is added to S:
(1) In the case of DRs, the absolute difference 
between the desired temporal distance ij of
texts Ti and Tj as given in Table 1 (right half)
and the actual difference of their datings
(jdi  dj j) is calculated:  ¼ jjdi  dj j ij j.
If  is larger than a threshold  ¼ 100,
 ¼   ð1  PijÞ2 is added to S. Pij is the
P value of the DR that connects text Ti with
text Tj . The inverted and squared value of Pij
incorporates the statistical significance of the
rule that connects Ti and Tj into the resulting
penalty, because the violation of more signifi-
cant rules results in a higher penalty.
(2) An OR can be interpreted as a temporal limit,
which is set up by the dating of Tj for the
dating of Ti (if Ti < Tj), or as an inequality
condition di < dj . A quadratic barrier func-
tion can be used as a good and easily differ-
entiable approximation for this inequality
condition [see Boyd and Vandenberghe
(2004, p. 562ff.) for a similar, but logarithmic
barrier]: if di  dj , a penalty
Table 1 Statistically significant time rules extracted from (sub)trees; ¼ 0.1
OR P-value DR Average distance P-value
RCINT<RMAN˜J 0.0038 RCINT<>RSK 0.43 0.0205
RHT<RCINT 0.0625 RMAN˜J<>RRS 0.14 0.0410
RCINT<BHPR 0.0195 RMAN˜J<>RRA¯ 0.21 0.0597
RCINT<S´DHSAMq H 0.0313 RMAN˜J<>RARNq 0.35 0.0056
RSK<RCINT 0.0625 RMAN˜J<>RSS 0.13 0.0132
RPSUDH<RMAN˜J 0.0059 RMAN˜J<>RSK 0.44 0.0781
RRS<RMAN˜J 0.0717 RHT<>RPSUDH 0.32 0.0781
RRA¯<RMAN˜J 0.0216 RPSUDH<>RRA¯ 0.38 0.0087
RARNq <RMAN˜J 0.0021 RPSUDH<>RARNq 0.41 0.0260
RCU¯M<RMAN˜J 0.0461 RPSUDH<>S´DHSAMq H 0.38 0.0888
RSK<RMAN˜J 0.0625 RRS<>RCu¯M 0.07 <0.0000
RHT<RRS 0.0156 RRA¯<>RARNq 0.16 0.0042
RHT<RSS 0.0313 RRA¯<>RCU¯M 0.35 0.0355
RPSUDH<RRS 0.0145 RARNq <>RCU¯M 0.40 0.0053
RARNq <RPSUDH 0.0730 BHPR<>S´DHSAMq H 0.08 <0.0000
RPSUDH<RSS 0.0461
RPSUDH<RCU¯M 0.0000
RRA¯<RRS 0.0004
RARNq <RRS 0.0002
RRS<RCU¯M 0.0717
RRA¯<RSS 0.0121
RRA¯<RCU¯M 0.0001
RRA¯<BHPR 0.0065
RRA¯<S´DHSAMq H 0.0193
RARNq <RSS 0.0001
RARNq <RCU¯M 0.0003
RARNq <BHPR 0.0156
RARNq <S´DHSAMq H 0.0313
Chronometric approach to alchemical literature
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 379
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 ¼ ðdi  djÞ2  ð1  pijÞ2 is added to S. If a
temporal limit D constituted by dated manu-
scripts (see Table 2), or the global time frame
are transgressed,  is calculated in a similar
way:  ¼ ðdi  DÞ2 (in these cases, P is not
used because these rules are not assessed
statistically).
The minimization of S, which leads to an optimal
arrangement of datings, is performed with a gradient
descent method. Apart from the amount function in
DR,13 the calculation is straightforward and yields a
list of texts sorted by decreasing age. Gradient des-
cent is not guaranteed to find a global minimum of
the error function or the optimal order of texts.
Therefore, the whole optimization is repeated several
times. Since the data have inherent numerical uncer-
tainties, we are not interested in absolute datings, but
only in a relative chronology of the alchemical
corpus. The resulting rank counts after fifty repeti-
tions are reported in Table 3. The table shows that the
alchemical literature has a clear tripartite structure,
which is largely consistent with results of traditional
philological research as reported in Meulenbeld
(2000), White (1996), or Ray (1956):
(1) ‘Early texts’ comprise RHT, RARnq , RADHY, and
RRA¯. The fact that the RSK is also contained in
this group is the only important deviation
from the traditional scheme of Indian alchemy.
This is probably a misplacement since the RSK
shows a combination of alchemical and a¯yur-
vedic theories, which is typical for the middle
and late periods of Indian alchemy (see, e.g. the
medical preparations in Chapter 4 of the RSK).
As can be seen from Table 1, RSK is only con-
nected to RCINT and RMAN˜J. It is possible that
the low number of constraints was responsible
for the misplacement of the text.
The remaining four texts certainly belong
to the early group. It is an almost undisputed
fact that RHT and RARNq are founding texts
of Indian alchemy. RRA¯ is perhaps a compi-
lation, but nevertheless contains basic and
old material. Finally, the RADHY comes from
a seemingly isolated alchemical tradition
which contains many archaic or at least extra-
ordinary features. Among these special
Table 3 Distribution of texts on ranks after 50 repetitions of the optimization algorithm
Text 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 avg. rank
BHPR 3 4 2 16 14 11 11.3
RADHY 12 8 3 8 15 2 1 1 3.4
RARNq 9 10 23 7 1 2.6
RCINT 16 2 16 12 4 7.7
RCU¯M 4 30 13 3 6.3
RHT 19 13 12 5 1 2.1
RMAN˜J 34 11 5 10.4
RPSUDH 2 30 15 3 7.4
RRS 1 11 30 5 3 9.0
RRA¯ 8 20 22 4.3
RSK 10 19 4 10 7 2.7
RSS 4 1 5 15 21 4 11.2
S´DHSAMq H 5 10 35 12.6
Table 2 Fixed time rules deduced from dated manu-
scripts and citations
Rule Source
BHPR<1558 manuscript (Meulenbeld 2000, IIA, 246)
RMAN˜J<1546 manuscript (Meulenbeld 2000, II A, 638)
RRS<1699 manuscript (Meulenbeld 2000, II A, 670/71)
RRA¯<1473 manuscript (Meulenbeld 2000, II A, 665)
RADHY<1386 manuscript (Meulenbeld 2000, II A, 616)
RCU¯M<RRS citations
RARNq <RRS citations
RRA¯<RCINT citations
RHT<RCINT citations
RARNq <RCINT citations
RHT<RCU¯M citations
RCU¯M<RPSUDH citations
O. Hellwig
380 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
features are alchemical apparatus of a quite
primitive character, an unusual terminology
using many ‘alchemical hapax legomena’ and
an irregular arrangement of the alchemical
samq ska¯ras.
(2) The ‘middle layer’ contains the group RCU¯M,
RRS, and RPSUDH. RRS, although held in
highest esteem in Indian alchemy, is a compi-
lation of previous alchemical material in large
parts, and cites intensively from RCU¯M. The
RPSUDH formulates the same ideas as RCU¯M
and RRS with slightly different words. In
addition, RCINT belongs to the middle
group. This result is consistent with the style
and content of this work.
(3) In the ‘late group’, we find texts that are of an
obvious medical character. Apart from RMAN˜J
and RSS, which are alchemical works with an
a¯yurvedic orientation, the a¯yurvedic texts
BHPR and S´DHSAMq H, which treat alchemy
only in a few chapters, belong to this group.
The date of S´DHSAMq H found with the numer-
ical method differs from the traditional res-
earch opinion. Dates proposed for S´DHSAMq H
range from the eleventh to the sixteenth cen-
tury [cmp. (Meulenbeld, 2000, II B, p. 233)].
Meulenbeld and Ray place the work in the
fourteenth century (middle layer) for internal
reasons (cf. Meulenbeld, 2000, II A, p. 206–07;
Ray, 1956, p. 160–61). The alchemical proce-
dures described in the S´DHSAMH closely resem-
ble those in the BHPR, which is a late text
[Sixteenth century; cf. (Meulenbeld, 2000,
IIA, p. 245)] and cites from the S´DHSAMq H.
The alchemical teachings of both texts can be
compared with those of other late treatises
such as the RMAN˜J, where alchemy is partly
superseded by a¯yurvedic theories. In my opi-
nion, the S´DHSAMq H should, therefore, be placed
within the late group or at least between the
middle and the late groups.
5. Conclusion
This article describes a numerical framework to
deduce the chronological stratification of a corpus
of Indian alchemical texts from changes in their
content. The method is based on the assumption
that the content of alchemical procedures changes
over the course of time at an approximately con-
stant rate. To capture these changes, methods from
bioinformatics (sequence alignment, phylogenetic
trees) are combined with basic non-parametric sta-
tistical tests and a gradient descent minimization
algorithm. The results found using this approach
coincide with the main philological theories regard-
ing the development of Indian alchemy. Although
detailed philological knowledge of the encoded texts
(and a lot of time) was required to build the data-
base of alchemical procedures, the contents-based
numerical approach has yielded very promising
results, and may be applied to investigate the (rela-
tive) chronology of other literary traditions of med-
ieval India.
