
1 Introduction
Traditionally, research contributions in the huma-
nities field have been felt to be, and documented to
be, predominantly solo efforts by academics invol-
ving little direct collaboration with others, a model
reinforced through doctoral studies and beyond
(See, for example, Fennel et al., 1983; Newell
et al., 2000; Cuneo, 2003). However, Humanities
Computing/Digital Humanities is an exception to
this. Given that the nature of research work involves
computers and a variety of skills and expertise,
Digital Humanities researchers are working colla-
boratively within their institutions and with others
nationally and internationally to undertake this
research. This research typically involves the need
to coordinate efforts between academics, under-
graduate and graduate students, research assistants,
computer programmers/developers, librarians, and
other individuals as well as the need to manage
financial and other resources. Despite this, there
has been little formal research on team development
Correspondence:
Lynne Siemens,
Faculty of Business/School
of Public Administration,
University of Victoria,
Victoria, BC Canada.
E-mail: siemensl@uvic.ca
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
225
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp009 Advance Access Published on 13 April 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
within this community with few protocols in place
to prepare individuals to work within these research
teams.
2 Context
As team research and collaboration become more
prevelant, reflection on the nature of collaboration
within academic communities is gaining attention.
In an article examining academic-practitioner colla-
boration in management research, Amabile et al.
(2001) argue that it is necessary to understand the
nature of collaboration and the factors that contri-
bute to its success while minizing the potential dif-
ficulties. Canada’s primary funding agency, Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council
(SSHRC), is also examining the factors that encou-
rage research success in large team research projects
(Kishchuk, 2005; SSHRC, 2005). In addition, aca-
demic research teams themselves are reflecting on
their own experiences to better understand the fac-
tors that influence research team success (See, for
example, Bracken et al., 2006; Garland et al., 2006;
Massey et al., 2006). However, despite this increas-
ing focus on research teams, there has been minimal
research on the role of teams within academic com-
munities, particularly within the Humanities
(Birnbaum, 1981; Kraut et al., 1987, 1988; Newell
et al., 2000; Cech et al., 2004).
Within the Digital Humanities community,
efforts toward understanding the organizational
context in which Digital Humanites research is situ-
ated is beginning in earnest. Two large-scale survey
projects (Siemens et al., 2002; Toms et al., 2004)
have highlighted issues of collaboration, among
other topics, and Warwick (2004) found that the
organizational context has had an impact on the
manner in which Digital Humanities/Humanities
Computing centres developed in the United States
and England. Other similar studies are underway as
well. In addition, within his recent book, McCarty
(2005b) explores ways that computers have
opened opportunities for collaboration within
the Humanities. In addition, he has explored the
associated challenges of collaboration and team
research within the HUMANIST listserve which
he moderates (McCarty, 2005a). Several members
of the community have also reflected on lessons
learned through collaboration (e.g. Unsworth,
2003, 2007; Liu et al., 2007; Ramsay, 2008;
Ruecker et al., 2008a,b; Smith et al., 2008). Finally,
through efforts such as the University of Victoria’s
Digital Humanities Summer Institute and other
similar ventures, the community is working to
develop its collaborative capacity through work-
shops with topics such as community-specific pro-
ject management skills and team development and
support.
Drawing upon these efforts, this paper explores
and documents the nature of research teams within
the Digital Humanities community to the end of
identifying exemplary work patterns and larger
models of research collaboration that have the
potential to strengthen this positive aspect of the
community even further. It is part of a larger
research project focused on answering questions
on the ways that research teams within this com-
munity function.
3 Methods
Given its exploratory nature, this project uses a
qualitative research approach with in-depth inter-
views with members of various multi-disciplinary,
multi-location project teams in Canada, the United
States, and England. The interview questions focus
on the participants’ definition of teams; their
experiences working in teams; and the types of sup-
ports and research preparation required to ensure
effective and efficient research results within teams.
These interviews allow the researcher to explore
topics more fully and deeply with probing and
follow up questions while the participants reflect
on their own experiences and emphasize those
issues which are important to them (McCracken,
1988; Rubin et al., 1995; Marshall et al., 1999).
Data analysis involves a grounded theory
approach, which focuses on the themes that
emerge from the data. This analysis is broken into
several steps. First, the data is organized, read and
coded to determine categories, themes and patterns.
These are tested for emergent and alternative
L. Siemens
226 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
understandings, both within a single interview and
across all interviews. This is an iterative process,
involving movement between the data, codes and
concepts, constantly comparing the data to itself
and the developing themes (Glaser et al., 1967;
Marshall et al., 1999).
4 Results
The interviewed individuals have been and continue
to be members of a diverse range of team research
projects, in terms of research objectives, team mem-
bership size, budget, and geographical dispersion.
These projects have been located within their own
institutions, as well as nationally and internation-
ally. Some of these projects have been relatively
small with a few team members and limited project
scope while others are very large with many team
members and larger project scope and budget. A
variety of disciplines and discipline-specific meth-
ods of work are also represented on these teams.
These projects have met varying degrees of success
in terms of meeting project goals and member satis-
faction as evaluated by the interviewees themselves.
The participants have played a variety of project
roles including research assistant, researcher, com-
puter programmer/developer, and lead investigator.
In several cases, their roles have changed within a
particular research project as they gained skills and
completed academic training. In terms of individual
demographics, there is also diversity as can be seen
in Table 1.
The first identified theme from the interviews
focuses on the definition of a team. In their collec-
tive opinion, a team is a group of individuals who
share common goals, outcomes, and output. One
participant stated that a team was ‘people working
together toward a common project or goal’. For the
interviewees, inherent in this definition is the need
for responsibility, accountability, communication,
and collaboration among team members. In other
words, individuals do not work in isolation on these
research projects, but rather in concert with team
members to accomplish the team’s goals. In addi-
tion, reflecting the variety of tasks required to com-
plete a Digital Humanities project, a group
is needed to accomplish these. Several participants
also make the distinction between a team and a
community, drawing upon differences in levels of
accountability and responsibility. As the title of
this paper suggests, one is part of a team when
one uses ‘reply all’ when responding to an email,
given the responsibility and need to coordinate
with team members. This very action is necessary
to ensure that team members communicate with
each other and the team as a whole. This same obli-
gation may not be present within a community. The
elements of team definition are highlighted in Fig. 1.
From their understanding of teams, the partici-
pants elaborate further on the elements of successful
and unsuccessful teams. The participants define a
successful team as one which meets both its goals
and outcomes while maintaining a good working
relationship throughout the life of the project. As
shown in Fig. 2, the components of successful teams
include tasks, working relationships and time. When
discussing the task component, the participants
emphasize the need for clearly defined tasks, goals,
roles, and milestones, which are negotiated by the
team itself. With these, team members understand
their role and relationship to each other and the
project. The need for planning becomes inherent
within this understanding of project success. For
example, as one interviewee commented, ‘a well
run team has benchmarks along the way to guide
the research project’. Another echoed this with the
observation that there needs to be a ‘clear and
shared understanding of what is to get done’ in
order to be successful.
While clearly defined tasks, milestones and out-
comes are necessary, these are not sufficient for
Table 1 Demographics of individual participants
Characteristic Number
Gender Female: 3
Male: 9
Country of employment Canada: 6
USA: 4
England: 2
Present role in community Faculty: 8
Developer/programmer: 1
Administration: 2
Post-doctoral Fellow/Research: 1
‘It’s a team if you use ‘‘reply all’’ ’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 227
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
a successful team project. A productive working
relationship among team members must also be
present and may even be more important than the
task component to overall project success. The par-
ticipants comment that it is by (un)productive
working relationships that many projects live and
die. These relationships are comprised of dignity,
respect, trust, and understanding among team
members at all project stages. As one interviewee
stated, ‘there is something about the interpersonal
dimension that is really important’. Within this
context, some participants comment on the tension
that can exist in this regard between the technical-
oriented members and academics on a team. For a
working relationship to contribute to project suc-
cess, the interviewees reflect that all members must
be treated collegially and with respect, regardless of
role or training.
The participants also provide several possible
measures of successful work relationships. One par-
ticipant suggests that a successful team is one where
the ‘team feels as happy getting together at the end
of the project as they were in the beginning’. For
another participant, trust must exist among the
team members so that one is able to send a direct
email asking ‘ ‘‘have you done this yet’’ and know-
ing that you are not being rude’. According to most
participants, an effective working relationship can
also be motivating and can create continued com-
mitment to the project. As highlighted by several
participants, the director/project lead plays an
important role in creating this valuable relationship
and has the responsibility to develop an environ-
ment that encourages trust and respect. One parti-
cipant stated that an effective director ‘finds what
each person is good at and then finds a way for
them to contributed and fulfill their potential in
the project’. Building on this, another interviewee
felt it was ‘the role of the boss to respond’ to pro-
blems. When they do not, ‘an atmosphere of dis-
trust and anger’ may be created. If they do not
accomplish this, the end result may be unsuccessful
teams which may have accomplished the tasks but
at the sacrifice of the working relationship.
The timing of these efforts to define tasks, out-
comes and timelines and create an effective working
relationship becomes the final consideration for a
successful team. The participants stress the need to
begin these activities as early as possible, often
during the grant development process, before the
actual ‘work’ commences. They also feel that these
efforts must be reinforced on a regular basis
throughout the project’s life to ensure continued
collaboration and commitment to it. Whether in
person or by conference call, regular meetings are
a key activity within these efforts. Finally, this time
component often extends beyond the original pro-
ject. One successful project may prompt people to
work together on a second phase of that project or
to even begin a new project. As a result, the parti-
cipants feel that the subsequent projects with the
same members may be better equipped to be suc-
cessful because there is already an environment of
trust and respect. As one participant articulates, ‘a
second project with the many of the same team is in
place precisely because there was a first successful
project’.
Because these participants have been involved in
various projects, they are quite cognizant of the
Team
Common goals/ 
outcomes/outputs 
Need for responsibility, 
accountability,
communication and 
collaboration
Diversity of tasks and 
individuals 
Not possible by 
an individual 
Fig. 1 Definition of a team
Timing of Efforts 
Task Component Working Relationship 
Component 
Clearly defined goals, 
tasks, milestones and 
deadlines
Dignity, trust, respect and 
understanding
Role of Director 
Successful teams 
Fig. 2 Components of a successful team
L. Siemens
228 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
many challenges and benefits related to team
research. The challenges are many and are predict-
able at times. Research teams often encounter per-
sonality difficulties and conflicts. This may be
compounded by the ‘I know best’ attitude of
many academics, as highlighted by several partici-
pants. Communication and coordination between
team members on various levels provide ongoing
challenges. These tend to reflect the tension that
can exist between programmers and non-program-
mers, the varying perspectives of different disci-
plines, a lack of common language and
understanding of the project between team mem-
bers, and a possible feeling of isolation that can
occur due to information gaps or geographical dis-
persion. Given the diversity of skills, disciplines, and
individuals involved in many of these projects, stan-
dards on roles, expectations, outputs, and credit
must be negotiated with each project. These issues
can become compounded exponentially as the
number of team members and the amount of geo-
graphical dispersion increases.
Teams also struggle with members who do not
contribute equitably. One participant describes a
successful team as a ‘round thing’ with equitable
contribution by individual members. A team may
become lopsided with uneven effort on the part of
members. Time and commitment are ongoing
issues given that individuals are generally limited
in their ability to devote 100% of their time to a
particular project. The final challenge relates to the
need for ongoing funding and retention of team
members. Digital Humanities projects often need
more money than traditional Humanities projects.
As a result, ensuring consistent funding can be a
struggle. Thus, it may be difficult to keep people
involved as money ebbs and flows over the life of
the project. As a result, teams must often train many
new people over the life of a project, creating
another challenge.
However, team research creates many benefits
that often offset the challenges, thus ensuring that
team research continues. This larger network of
individuals with a variety of skills and knowledge
creates a richness of interaction and synergies that
is often not found in solitary research. Certainly,
team research presents an opportunity for social
interaction. Single scholar research can often be a
lonely affair, as pointed out by several interviewees.
Team research ensures that knowledge gaps are
addressed. As one participant reflects, ‘team
research prompts one to think at a different level
about a project than is possible by oneself’. Another
stated that ‘it is rare that someone can do it all in
digital projects’. Finally, team research builds
ongoing relationships that can create the potential
for future projects. As one participant remarks,
team research is a ‘double-edged sword’. Those
very challenges ultimately translate into the benefits
that allow a team to accomplish more than any
single individual. Table 2 summaries the benefits
and challenges of team research.
The research teams, in which these individuals
participant, draw upon a variety of communication
and collaboration tools. Given the nature of
research within Digital Humanities, these research
teams employ a range of digital and electronic com-
munication and collaboration tools. The teams use
wikis, blogs, websites, email, listserves, shared online
project spaces, and instant messaging for record
keeping of decisions, tasks and deadlines and the
timely sharing of information with team members.
Some teams also use instant messaging for quick
exchanges in real time in a way that the other digital
Table 2 Benefits and challenges of team research
Benefits Challenges
Richness of interaction and synergies Personality and discipline difficulties
Greater accomplishments than possible by a single individual Communication and coordination challenges
Social interaction Inequitable distribution of effort
Creates potential for additional projects with same individuals Time and commitment
Funding
Retention of team members
‘It’s a team if you use ‘‘reply all’’ ’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 229
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
tools do not allow. All these methods are particu-
larly useful for those teams whose members are geo-
graphically dispersed and very busy. However, these
tools present several challenges. The digital tools are
sometimes viewed as one more task for already busy
people. In addition, people struggle with overflow-
ing email inboxes and often do not read nor
respond to emails to the frustration of team mem-
bers. The participants also feel that it is difficult to
bond and establish productive working relation-
ships or resolve contentious issues with digital tools.
These teams also draw heavily upon verbal com-
munication tools in two forms to develop their col-
laborative work relationships. First, conference calls,
either by phone or Skype, are standard for many
teams. In addition, the participants meet face-to-
face on a regular basis to fulfill several objectives.
First, these meetings are useful for reviewing pro-
gress from previous meetings and planning next
steps. Second, agenda items often include those
‘thorny’ issues, which cannot be easily resolved by
conference calls or email. In other cases, some
groups use face-to-face time for concentrated
effort on direct project work. Finally, these meetings
are also a time to ‘enjoy each other’s company over
good meals and drinks’, as highlighted by one inter-
viewee. All these efforts contribute to the establish-
ment of commitment, obligation, and responsibility
to each other and the larger project. As one partici-
pant stated, ‘if there is too much time between
meetings, you do not feel like a team’. Another real-
ized that they ‘would never underestimate the value
of this again’. These benefits, however, come with
trade offs. Given the size of the teams, scheduling
these meetings can be difficult and time-consuming.
In addition, the projects generally face budget lim-
itations, which can constrain the frequency with
which the teams can meet. Funding guidelines
may also impose constraints on hospitality budgets.
(See Siemens, 2008 for a fuller discussion on the use
of communication and collaboration tools in Digital
Humanities research teams.)
For the most part, these participants have learned
to work in teams through direct experience and/or
observation of research teams. In some cases, parti-
cipants have worked within a semi-formal appren-
ticeship model where they started as research
assistants on a project and then developed skills,
which led to increasing amounts of responsibility
and contribution in subsequent projects. The parti-
cipants express some skepticism about management
training and its application to Digital Humanities
research. However, they are open to the possibility
and suggested that potential training might include
exposure to the similarities and differences with
other disciplines, ways to be a good colleague, and
how to effectively chair meetings. Participants sug-
gest that there may be a possibility for the incor-
poration of more team projects within classes as a
way to train the next generation of Digital
Humanities researchers.
5 Implications for practice
From this exploration of research teams within the
Digital Humanities environment, several implica-
tions for practice can be recommended. These
focus on various levels within a research team
environment.
(1) Deliberate action and commitment on the part
of the individual team member—When one
decides to join a research team, one is commit-
ting to both identified components of a team,
that is, common goals, tasks, and output, and
accountability and commitment to the team.
Thus, to be a productive team member is to
commit oneself to the team’s common goals,
outcomes, and output as they have been nego-
tiated by the members. Any individual goals
and desired outcomes must then fit within
these objectives and goals. Second, and per-
haps more importantly, one is agreeing to cer-
tain expectations about working relationships
and responsibility to other team members.
Again, one cannot do one’s own thing within
a research team. As a result, individuals are
well advised to evaluate their commitment to
a team prior to joining it to ensure that they
can follow through on it. Once one accepts
this commitment, their most important role
on the team is to be a ‘good colleague’, as
suggested by one of the participants.
L. Siemens
230 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(2) Deliberate action by the project leader—As
highlighted above, the project leader plays a
particularly important role in shaping the
work environment for these teams to ensure
project and research success. They must ensure
that team members understand the commit-
ments they have made to the team and that
they subsequently live up to these. To ensure
productive work relationships, project leaders
need to ensure that the project remains
‘round’, not lopsided, and respond to those
who do not contribute equitably. The project
leader also plays an important role as a model
for the desired behaviours. Towards this end,
project leaders must facilitate the necessary
and ongoing discussions that establish the
parameters of the team’s working relationship.
(3) Deliberate action by the team—Potential team
members must reflect at the beginning of any
discussions toward a team research project on
the inherent benefits and challenges of team
research. By recognizing these in advance,
teams can take deliberate steps to maximize
the benefits while minimizing the challenges.
These steps might include focused discussion
and negotiation of project goals, outcomes,
and tasks with the aim of building commit-
ment and buy-in. In addition, teams must
develop a common language among members
from various discipline backgrounds so that
communication and collaboration can be
effective and efficient. Members might also
explore the similarities and differences
between the various academic cultures and
disciplines as well as the ones between techni-
cal and non-technical team members. As Liu
and Smith (2007) argue, team members must
be open to the differences that exist between
various discipline perspectives and take active
steps to explore these differences in advance to
reduce confusion and misunderstandings.
(4) Deliberate training—On-the-job training of
technical and team skills can be effective; how-
ever, it must be used again with deliberate
action. Senior team members must model
desired behaviours and create learning envir-
onments where junior members can gain
necessary skills and responsibilities while con-
tributing to projects. Group projects within
courses may be an additional way to develop
the necessary skills within students in advance
of participation in team research projects.
Ultimately, the development of team collabora-
tive skills will serve students well as they look for
employment within and without the academy.
This training can be supplemented with reflec-
tion on team processes. Through reflection,
team members can establish the key behaviours,
tasks, and other factors that contribute to pro-
ject success. These lessons can then be trans-
ferred to other teams through both formal
and informal mechanisms. For example, at
recent conferences for Digital Humanities,
Society for Digital Humanities/Socie´te´ pour
l’e´tude des me´dias interactifs and other associa-
tions, several papers focusing on various aspects
of team processes were presented. In addition,
these lessons are transferred to groups as people
move between various research teams. As a
practical example, Ruecker and Radzikowska
(2008a) outline the expanding use of a project
charter among various teams in which they are
involved.
(5) Balance between digital and in-personal com-
munication and collaboration tools—Digital
communication and collaboration tools are
very effective for geographically dispersed
teams, particularly for Digital Humanities
teams, which already have an affinity for the
digital environment. However, the digital
cannot replace the many benefits that flow
from in-person interactions, including the
development of positive working relationships.
A balance between the digital and the personal
must be established and ensure that the tools
selected support both the task and working
relationship components of successful teams.
As a result, budgeting for the use of digital and
in-person tools, including face-to-face meet-
ings, must be included in project plans and
budgets. Money and time is needed to support
these tools and it can be argued that project
success often hinges on them, a point to stress
with project funders.
‘It’s a team if you use ‘‘reply all’’ ’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 231
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
6 Conclusion
Research teams are widely used in the Digital
Humanities community to undertake various
research projects. The teams in which these partici-
pants have been involved have been successful and
found ways to manage many of the various chal-
lenges associated with this type of work. This
study is one step towards understanding the
nature of these research teams while recommending
several best practices. However, there is more
research to be done. At this point, a relatively
small number of individuals involved in Digital
Humanities research projects based in Canada, the
US, and England have been interviewed. Additional
interviews are ongoing. In addition, a survey will be
conducted to explore the above themes further
within the community at large and provide
more empirical data. Further, as more Digital
Humanities research teams involve members from
a variety of countries, the issues of different cultures,
languages, and geography should be explored to
determine the impact that these may have on
these teams. Finally, further study of research
teams in other disciplines might provide further
learnings for Digital Humanities research teams.
With this knowledge, further research protocols
and supports can be developed to support the
ongoing Digital Humanities research work, capita-
lizing on these positive aspects of the community
even further.
References
Amabile, T. M., Patterson, C., Mueller, J. et al. (2001).
Academic-practitioner collaboration in management
research: a case of cross-profession collaboration.
Academy of Management Journal, 44(2): 418–31.
Birnbaum, P. H. (1981). Academic interdisciplinary
research: characteristics of successful projects. Journal
of the Society of Research Administrators, 13(1): 5–16.
Bracken, L. J. and Oughton, E. A. (2006). ‘What do you
mean?’ the importance of language in developing inter-
disciplinary research. Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers, 31(3): 371–82.
Cech, T. R. and Rubin, G. M. (2004). Nurturing inter-
disciplinary research. Nature Structural & Molecular
Biology, 11(12): 1166–9.
Cuneo, C. (2003). Interdisciplinary teams – let’s make
them work. University Affairs. November: 18–21.
Fennel, M. and Sandefur, G. D. (1983). Structural
clarity of interdisciplinary teams: a research note.
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 19(2):
193–202.
Garland, D. R., O’Connor, M. K., Wolfer, T. A. et al.
(2006). Team-based research: Notes from the field.
Qualitative Social Work, 5(1): 93–109.
Glaser, B. G. and Strauss, A. L. (1967). The Discovery of
Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research.
New York, NY: Aldine De Gruyter.
Kishchuk, N. (2005). Performance Report: SSHRC’s Major
Collaborative Research Initiatives (MCRI) Program,
Ottawa, Ontario: SSHRC.
Kraut, R. E., Galegher, J., and Egido, C. (1987–1988).
Relationships and tasks in scientific research collabora-
tion. Human-Computer Interaction, 3(1): 31–58.
Liu, Y. and Smith, J. (2007). Aligning the Agendas of
Humanities and Computer Science Research: A Risk/
reward Analysis, SDH-SEMI 2007, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan.
Marshall, C. and Rossman, G. B. (1999). Designing
Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Massey, C., Alpass, F., Flett, R. et al. (2006). Crossing
fields: The case of a multi-disciplinary research team.
Qualitative Research, 6(2): 131–49.
McCarty, W. (2005a). 19.215 How Far Collaboration?
Humanist Discussion Group. http://lists.village.virginia.
edu/lists_archive/Humanist/v19/0211.html (accessed
18 August 2005).
McCarty, W. (2005b). Humanities Computing. New York,
NY: Palgrave MacMillan.
McCracken, G. (1988). The Long Interview. Newbury
Park, CA: SAGE Publications.
Newell, S. and Swan, J. (2000). Trust and inter-organiza-
tional networking. Human Relations, 53(10): 1287–328.
Ramsay, S. (2008). Rules of the Order: The Sociology of
Large, Multi-institutional Software Development
Projects. Digital Humanities 2008, Oulu, Finland.
Rubin, H. J. and Rubin, I. S. (1995). Qualitative
Interviewing: The Art of Hearing Data. Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
L. Siemens
232 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Ruecker, S. and Radzikowska, M. (2008a). The Iterative
Design of a Project Charter for Interdisciplinary Research,
DIS 2008, Cape Town, South Africa.
Ruecker, S., Radzikowska, M., and Sinclair, S. (2008b).
Hackfests, Designfests, and Writingfests: The Role of
Intense Periods of Face-to-face Collaboration in
International Research Teams. Digital Humanities
2008, Oulu, Finland.
Siemens, L. (2008). The Balance Between On-line and In-
person Interactions: Methods for the Development of
Digital Humanities Collaboration, SDH-SEMI 2008,
Vancouver, British Columbia.
Siemens, R. G., Best, M., Grove-White, E. et al. (2002).
The credibility of electronic publishing: A report to the
humanities and social sciences federation of Canada.
Text Technology, 11(1): 1–128.
Smith, J. and Liu, Y. (2008). Collaboration Space:
Characterizing the Challenges of Interdisciplinary
Collaboration Projects, SDH-SEMI 2008, Vancouver,
British Columbia.
SSHRC. (2005). Report on the Consultations.
www.ssshrc.ca/web/whatsnew/initiatives/transformation/
reports/intro_e.asp (accessed 22 March 2005).
Toms, E., Rockwell, G., Sinclair, S. et al. (2004). The
humanities scholar in the twenty-first century: How
research is done and what support is needed. Joint
International Conference of the Association for
Computers and the Humanities and the Association for
Literary & Linguistic Computing. Go¨teborg, Sweden.
Published results forthcoming; results reported by
Siemens, et al., in abstract available at http://
www.hum.gu.se/allcach2004/AP/html/prop139.html
(accessed 25 March 2006).
Unsworth, J. (2003). The humanist: ‘‘dances with wolves’’
or ‘‘bowls alone’’? Scholarly Tribes and Tribulations:
How Tradition and Technology are Driving Disciplinary
Change. Washington, DC: Association of Research
Libraries.
Unsworth, J. (2007). Learning from Nora: Distributed
Software Development in the Humanities. Presented at
Indiana University, Bloomington, IN.
Warwick, C. (2004). ‘‘No such thing as humanities com-
puting?’’ An analytical history of digital resource crea-
tion and computing in the humanities. Joint
International Conference of the Association for
Computers and the Humanities and the Association for
Literary & Linguistic Computing, Go¨teborg, Sweden.
(Prepublication document available at http://tapor.
humanities.mcmaster.ca/html/Nosuchthing_1.pdf.
[accessed 25 March 2006]).
‘It’s a team if you use ‘‘reply all’’ ’
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 2, 2009 233
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
