An exercise in non-ideal authorship
attribution: the mysterious Maria
Ward
............................................................................................................................................................
David L. Hoover and Shervin Hess
Department of English, New York University, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
The dangers of computational approaches to authorship attribution in the
absence of an adequate set of training texts for the claimant authors are well
known. This study aims to show, however, that significant progress can be made
even where conditions are quite problematic. We investigate a difficult author-
ship question involving three texts, ostensibly by three authors, each of whom
wrote nothing else. Only one of the texts can be unquestionably ascribed to a
known author, and this author has been suggested as the true author of one of
the two remaining texts. We investigate these three texts, along with similar texts
by other authors, using cluster analysis, Delta analysis, t-testing, and PCA. We
also create simulations of our authorship problem using sets of three texts of
known authorship by one, two, and three authors. We test these sets using correct
and incorrect assumptions of authorial difference, and then compare the results
with analyses of our three texts based on the same range of assumptions. By
combining information from all of these tests, we achieve what we believe is a
persuasive, if not conclusive, solution to a significant and long-standing question
concerning the authorship of Maria Warda’s violently anti-Mormon Female Life
Among the Mormons. At the same time, we demonstrate methods for making
progress in cases where conditions are less than ideal.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1. Introduction
We investigate here an authorship question invol-
ving Female Life Among the Mormons (Ward, 1855;
Female Life, below).1 This rabidly anti-Mormon
first-person autobiographical account, purportedly
written by the wife of a Mormon Elder, sold huge
numbers of copies and remained in print for at least
thirty-five years. Though published anonymously,
the narrative reveals its author as Maria Ward. Yet
the book has long been tentatively identified as a
pseudonymous work of fiction by Mrs B. G.
Ferris. The identity of the author of Female Life
strikes us as an intrinsically interesting question
that has ramifications for religious studies, history,
politics, and literary studies, especially when we
consider that Mrs B. G. Ferris was the wife of a
former Secretary of Utah Territory.
Because traditional authorship investigation has
been unable to supply a firm attribution, a compu-
tational investigation seems appropriate. Yet the
conditions for such an investigation are far
from ideal: no other writings by Maria Ward or
Mrs B. G. Ferris are known, though there is one
other book that Maria Ward claims to have
edited. In such unpromising cases, one valuable
Correspondence:
David L. Hoover,
Department of English,
New York University,
19 University Place,
5th Floor, New York,
NY 10003, USA.
E-mail:
david.hoover@nyu.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009.  The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC and ACH. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org
467
doi:10.1093/llc/fqp027 Advance Access published on 13 July 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cautionary voice makes the following unequivocal
recommendation: ‘If you are planning a study and
cannot get the correct electronic texts, or you realize
that control texts do not exist, do not do the study’
(Rudman, 1997, p. 354). This is excellent advice for
an investigator looking for a problem upon which to
test authorship methods. Unfortunately the author-
ship of Female Life, like many other interesting and
compelling authorship attribution questions in
which traditional methods of determining author-
ship have been unsuccessful, lacks such adequate
texts and other information. What if we are not
willing just to give up? We present here a series of
approaches that we believe can shed a great deal of
light on this difficult problem. These approaches
should also prove useful in other attribution pro-
blems in which the question is compelling but less-
than-ideal conditions preclude a computational
investigation based on best practices.
2. Historical Context
The Second Great Awakening suffused mid-
nineteenth-century America with a host of new
faiths, a new brand of politics, and a surge of reli-
gious bigotry aimed at non-Protestants. Catholics
and Jews bore the brunt of this intolerance, but as
the nation grappled with the issue of slavery,
another moral dilemma drew the attention of
both the nation and Congress: polygamy. The prac-
tice of polygamy, or plural marriage, cast a
shadow over the Mormon Church, still in its
infancy, and accounts of it horrified the American
people, who cried out for an end to what they saw
as enslavement of white women (Gordon, 2002,
pp. 47ff).
The Mormon Church had been attacked almost
from its beginnings, but when it first publicly
approved plural marriage in 1852, the same year
Uncle Tom’s Cabin was published, this combination
of events stimulated the writing of anti-Mormon
novels, which would number more than fifty by
the first decade of the twentieth century
(Arrington and Haupt, 1968, p. 244). The scandal-
ous scenarios painted by the anti-polygamy
novelists became wildly popular. Storylines often
followed a beautiful young heroine’s experience of
being kidnapped, enslaved, or otherwise mesmer-
ized by a depraved Mormon husband with an
insatiable appetite for collecting wives. Popular
anti-Mormon literature includes a surprising
number of texts by well known authors. Chapters
about Mormons appear in Mark Twain’s Roughing
It (1872), though, characteristically, his barbs are in
the service of humor. Robert Louis Stevenson
includes a chapter on the Mormons, ‘Story of the
Destroying Angel,’ in The Dynamiter (1885)
(written with his wife Fanny). The antagonists in
Arthur Conan Doyle’s first Sherlock Holmes novel,
A Study in Scarlet (1887) are a band of Mormon
men who kidnap gentile women. Zane Grey’s
Rider’s of the Purple Sage (1912) and The Rainbow
Trail (1915), both portray numerous atrocities com-
mitted by Mormons, and Jack London treats the
infamous Mountain Meadows massacre in his The
Star Rover (1915).
As public outcry against polygamy heightened,
driven in large part by popular literature, members
of Congress grew uneasy over the power that
the Mormon Church wielded in the Utah
Territory. The recently formed Republican party
used anti-polygamy as one of its campaigning
platforms, referring to polygamy and slavery as the
‘Twin Relics of Barbarism’ (Gordon, 2002, p. 55).
Fears that the remote territory would become a
rogue, theocratic state prompted Congress to enact
legislation aimed at tightening control over the
Mormon government. As early as 1856 Congress
had begun voting on measures that sought to
punish and prevent the practice of polygamy
in the Territories of the USA and other places
(H. R. 433, 1856). By 1862, the Morrill Anti-
Bigamy Act was signed into law, banning plural
marriage and limiting Church ownership of US
territory to $50,000. The law was ineffective,
however, largely because of the remote situation
of Utah Territory and a lack of funds for enforce-
ment (Gordon, 2002, pp. 81–3). The next round
of anti-polygamy legislation was enacted twenty-
five years later in 1887: under the Edmunds–
Tucker Act, civil marriage licenses were required,
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
468 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
wives were allowed to testify against their
husbands, and polygamy could be punished by a
fine of up to $800 (Woodworth-Ney, 2008, pp.
156–7).
The causes of anti-Mormon feeling were com-
plex, but both Mormon and literary historians
have argued that four books published in 1855
and 1856 served as the nucleus of anti-Mormon
propaganda and encouraged the litany of anti-
polygamy and anti-Mormon literature published
throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries: Alfreda Eva Bell’s Boadicea, the Mormon
Wife (Bell, 1855), Orvilla S. Belisle’s Mormonism
Unveiled (Belisle, 1855), Metta Victor’s Mormon
Wives (Victor, 1856), and Female Life Among the
Mormons (Ward, 1855; Arrington and Haupt,
1968, pp. 244–5; Gordon, 2002, pp. 29–32).
The last of these books stands apart for several
reasons to be explored here. Worldcat categorizes
the other three books as fiction, and Bell, Belisle,
and Victor already enjoyed some reputation in lit-
erary circles. Female Life, in contrast, is an anon-
ymous, first-person narrative, framed as an
autobiographical account. When it was first pub-
lished, a New York Times book review both
panned the book and labeled it fiction: ‘An anony-
mous work like this, making grave accusations
against a body, and against an individual, is not
entitled too much consideration at any rate. For
our part, we cannot bring ourselves to believe its
details are true’ (Review, 1855, p. 3).
Despite unfavorable reviews, the first edition of
Female Life sold at least 40,000 copies and was later
reprinted in Danish, French, Hungarian, Swedish,
and German (Worldcat, 2001–2008). It also went
through several subsequent editions with varying
titles and remained in print at least until 1890.
Both the name Maria Ward and Female Life have
long perplexed scholars. Though the work is now
widely regarded as fiction, questions surrounding its
authorship linger. Because it was one of the most
widely-read works of anti-Mormon propaganda,
determining its authorship may lead to a more
nuanced understanding of the politics at play
during the formative years of the relationship
between the USA and the Mormon Church.
3. Overview of Female Life
Female Life chronicles a period in the life of a
woman from Onondaga County, New York who
marries a Mormon man, referred to only as ‘Mr
Ward.’ She is quickly ‘hypnotized’ by the man and
agrees to wed. Over the course of their migration
west, she experiences many of the turning points in
Mormon history, from the persecution and murder
of Joseph Smith to the colonization of Utah. The
narrator marries and converts willingly, but is hor-
rified by the polygamous practices she witnesses
once in Utah Territory. She does not live in a polyg-
amous household, but she illustrates the harsh con-
ditions of the women who do. Throughout the text,
she highlights the brutal treatment of those women
who protest against the Church:
One poor woman, who had told an emigrant,
in the hearing of a Mormon elder, that polyg-
amy was a system of abominations, and who
repeated a few of her troubles and sufferings,
was taken one night when she stepped out for
water, gagged, carried a mile into the woods,
stripped nude, tied to a tree, and scourged till
the blood ran from her wounds to the ground
. . . . (Ward, 1855, p. 429)
The narrative also documents rules that plural wives
were expected to follow and the punishments
inflicted for disobedience. If two wives quarrel, for
example, ‘the one who commences the quarrel, to
receive the punishment, which varies in degree from
three lashes to twenty-five’ (Ward, 1855, p. 314).
Female Life concludes with the author’s escape
from Salt Lake City, but does not explain where
she fled to, or what became of her.
4. Maria Ward as Author
The opening chapter of Female Life reveals that the
author hails from near Ithaca, New York, but a
genealogical search for Maria Ward in all of New
York during her life yields no results. A search of the
genealogical records at Brigham Young University
likewise fails to produce a Maria Ward or any
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 469
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Mormon elders with the surname Ward in Utah
during the relevant time period. Other prominent
characters appearing in the novel were also absent
from the BYU genealogical records.
Maria Ward is also credited as having edited The
Husband in Utah (Ward, 1857), later reprinted as
Male Life Among the Mormons (Ward, 1863), pre-
sumably to emphasize the parallel with the very
popular Female Life. The later edition is apparently
printed from the same plates: it is identical down to
the hyphenation and the signatures, and the run-
ning heading remains ‘The Husband in Utah.’ In
her preface to Male Life, as we will refer to this
book, Maria Ward claims to have gathered and pub-
lished the letters of her husband’s late nephew
Austin, and promises that she has not ‘changed or
omitted a sentence’ (Ward, 1857, p. vi). The title
page of both editions also explicitly refers to
Maria Ward as ‘the author of ‘‘Female Life Among
the Mormons.’’ ’
A Library of Congress copyright registry search
yields no documentation for Maria Ward, Austin
Ward, Female Life or Male Life. The library database
Worldcat holds records for twenty-nine editions of
Female Life, eleven of which are categorized as fic-
tion. All editions list Maria Ward as the author, but
eight list an additional author: Mrs B. G. Ferris.
Among the twenty-three Worldcat records for
Austin Ward’s book, including editions in Danish
and Swedish, a few categorize it as fiction, but most
as ‘description and travel’; one record suggests that
Maria and Austin Ward are pseudonyms.
5. Mr and Mrs B. G. Ferris
Mrs B. G. (Cornelia) Ferris, a native of Ithaca, New
York, accompanied her husband B. G. (Benjamin)
Ferris to Utah from August 1852 to April of 1853
during his tenure as Secretary of Utah Territory.
Mr Ferris had completed only six months of his
four-year term when they returned to Ithaca,
where each of them published a book on
Mormonism and Utah. Mr Ferris’s Utah and the
Mormons (B. G. Ferris, 1854) presents a history of
Mormonism and Utah, and Mrs Ferris’s The
Mormons at Home (C. Ferris, 1856) is a compilation
of her letters written during their journey to and
from Utah and their time there.
Like many Federal appointees to Utah Territory,
B. G. Ferris found himself at odds with the Mormon
leadership. He was strongly opposed to the practices
and leadership of the Church, as is reflected in his
book, which chronicles the history of the Mormon
Church in a less than favorable light. Soon after his
return, members of Congress were consulting with
Mr Ferris about Utah and the Mormon government
there (House of Representatives, 1854). Ferris later
makes his perspective on Mormonism and the
Church-run Utah government violently clear in a
letter to the New York Times: ‘The unscrupulous
set of villains, congregated in the valley of the
Great Salt Lake, would put Pandemonium to
shame; and the time has come when their crimes
can no longer go unwhipped of justice without
national disgrace’ (B. G. Ferris, 1857, p. 1).
Mrs Ferris’ book did not stir as much contro-
versy as her husband’s, but her letters bear an
underlying anti-Mormon sentiment throughout,
and are sometimes quite harsh. When she meets
two of the three wives of a U. S. Marshal, for exam-
ple, she comments:
What a strange spectacle! Here was an elderly
woman, apparently of fair intelligence, and
correct notions of propriety, in whom the
feelings and instincts of womanhood may be
supposed to have become fixed and perma-
nent habits of thought, yielding all that is val-
uable to a ridiculous system of imposture–
in other words, becoming a concubine.
(C. Ferris, 1856, p. 138)
A little later, after labeling the Mormons ‘worshipers
of Beelzebub,’ she says, ‘Rig up a system that will
fasten itself upon the superstitious credulity and
animal appetites of the stupidly ignorant, and you
are ready for a flourishing business’ (p. 142). These
sentiments certainly accord well with Female Life.
We do not know who first theorized that Mrs
Ferris wrote Female Life, but one contributing
factor may have been that Maria Ward and Mrs
Ferris were both from the same part of upstate
New York. In any case, as early as 1873, a respected
bibliography lists both Ward and Ferris as its
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
470 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
authors (Sabin, 1873). Leonard Arrington, consid-
ered one of the twentieth-century’s most important
Mormon historians, attempted to confirm this
theory in the 1950s. After nearly a decade of
research, he concluded ‘that Mrs Ferris’ book, The
Mormons at Home . . . provided the basis for Male
Life Among the Mormons, a sequel to Female Life,
but that some other Eastern woman, not yet discov-
ered, was the real author of both the ‘Maria Ward’
books’ (Arrington and Haupt, 1968, p. 253). It is
tempting to suggest a connection between the attri-
bution of Female Life to Mrs Ferris and the fact that
the Mormon part of her own book was first pub-
lished under the heading ‘Life Among the
Mormons’ in Putnam’s Monthly Magazine
(C. Ferris, 1855). The same running heading
appears in the book form of The Mormons at
Home and in the 1872 edition of Female Life.
6. A Computational Analysis
A computational investigation of the authorship of
Female Life presents serious challenges. So far as we
can determine from external information, the puta-
tive author, the pseudonymous ‘Maria Ward,’ wrote
only this book. Likewise, the suggested author, Mrs
Ferris, wrote only The Mormons at Home. These
conditions do not meet the requirements that are
normally set for a valid non-traditional authorship
attribution (see, for example, Rudman, 1997), and
the situation is made even more difficult by the
problems of genre and gender. Female Life and
The Mormons at Home are both putatively non-
fictional first-person narratives by women, but the
fact that Maria Ward is a pseudonym leaves open
the possibility that her book is actually fiction. This
possibility is made nearly certain by the presence
of some extraordinary errors, including having
Joseph Smith shot dead from horseback after
helping a Mormon woman break out of jail (see
Etzenhouser, 1894, pp. 156–9, for a pro-Mormon
account of some other errors). There is also no
direct evidence that the author is a woman. In addi-
tion, only about the middle third of Mrs Ferris’s
book actually deals with the Mormons; the begin-
ning and end narrate the trip to and from Utah.
Adding to the complexity are the two related
books by Austin Ward and Benjamin Ferris. The
most intriguing for comparison with Female Life is
Austin Ward’s Male Life, which, as noted above,
Maria Ward claims to have edited. Naturally, if
‘Maria Ward’ is a pseudonym, ‘Austin Ward’ must
also be a pseudonym, leaving open the possibility
that Maria Ward actually also wrote Male Life. The
fictional status of Male Life is asserted unequivocally
by Sir Richard Burton, who spent three weeks in Salt
Lake City in 1860; he calls Male Life ‘pure invention’
(Burton, 1862, p. 207). Second, we have Benjamin
Ferris’s Utah and the Mormons (B. G. Ferris, 1854)
for comparison; though it is third-person nonfic-
tion, it is of interest because it slightly predates
Female Life, Male Life, and The Mormons at Home
and was written by Mrs Ferris’s husband. (The fact
that Mr Ferris’s book tells the true story of Joseph
Smith’s death casts further doubt on Mrs Ferris’s
authorship of Female Life.) Finally, there is no
dearth of contemporary first-person and third-
person accounts of Mormon life, some fiction,
some non-fiction, and some of the same doubtful
status as Female Life and Male Life.
6.1 Mormon-related first-person texts
Given the complexity of the situation and the lack of
definite training texts by Maria Ward and Mrs
Ferris, we begin with a group of Mormon-related
first-person fiction and nonfiction texts (minimum
7,000 words). Any similarity between Mrs Ferris and
Maria Ward will be more significant in the presence
of many other candidate authors. In Fig. 1, based on
the 800 MFW, only two authors, Kane and
Stenhouse, are represented by pairs of texts, and
Stenhouse’s two texts radically fail to cluster (all
analyses from the 500 to the 900 MFW are similar).
(All cluster analyses were performed in Minitab
(2005), with Ward linkage, squared Euclidean dis-
tance, and standardized variables.) However,
‘StenhouseMa’ is an excerpt from Stenhouse’s Tell
it All that purports to be Mary Burton’s story in her
own words, so that this cannot be considered a def-
inite error (Mary Burton’s story is also only about
one tenth as long as the rest of Tell it All). Adding
Mrs Ferris and Maria Ward (see Fig. 2) produces
a dendogram that provides no support for
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 471
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Mrs Ferris’s authorship of Female Life: the two
authors are in widely separated clusters. Female
Life and Male Life are the first two books to cluster,
which shows that they are the most similar books in
this set, and therefore suggests that Maria and
Austin Ward may be the same person.
6.2 First-person and third-person
Mormon and non-Mormon texts
We turn, then, to an analysis of thirty-five texts
(minimum 7,000 words), including Benjamin
Ferris’s Utah and the Mormons, with two texts by
each author wherever possible, though that means
comparing texts about Mormons with texts in
which they play no part. This allows us to train
the method on texts similar to our texts of interest,
select the kind of analysis that is most effective on
the texts of known authorship, and then insert
Ward and Ferris into the set, testing with the same
settings. The known texts by other authors compen-
sate, to some extent, for a lack of training texts by
our primary authors.2
The fact that ten of the thirteen pairs of texts
by known authors cluster together in Fig. 3, based
on the 400 MFW words, in spite of the fact that
most of them contain one Mormon and one non-
Mormon text, shows that this analysis is capturing
known authorship very effectively. (The 400–600
MFW produce the same number of correct clusters
for the known authors.) Although Doyle’s two texts
do not cluster correctly, they are near neighbors,
and the other two failures may not really
be errors. As before, Mary Burton’s story does not
Fig. 1 Eighteen first-person Mormon-related texts,
without M. Ward or C. Ferris
Fig. 2 Twenty first-person Mormon-related texts, with
M. Ward and C. Ferris
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
472 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
cluster with Stenhouse’s section in her own voice.
Bell’s texts also fail to cluster, but her non-
Mormon text, Rebel Cousins, is supposedly the
autobiography of Bertha Stephens, ‘prepared’ by
Bell, so that this, too, is not definitely an error.
Further complications in authorship among
these texts exist (for example, The Dynamiter was
co-written by Stevenson and his wife); some of
these will be discussed briefly below. This
analysis also shows that, even though nearly all of
the 400 words on which Fig. 3 is based are con-
tent words, the different subject matter in the
Mormon and Non-Mormon texts does not pre-
vent texts by the same author from clustering.
Given the large number of texts, their varied subject
matter and point of view, and the fact that some are
fiction and some non-fiction, these are strong
results.
Adding Maria Ward and Mrs Ferris produces the
dendrogram shown in Fig. 4. For this analysis, we
have divided Mrs Ferris’s The Mormons at Home
into three sections, so as to isolate the Mormon-
related second part. Even with four new texts
added, the same ten pairs of texts of known author-
ship cluster together here as in Fig. 3, and the two
Bell texts now also cluster together. Here, as in
Fig. 2, Maria and Austin Ward form a very tight
cluster that is widely separated from Mrs Ferris.
The clustering of the Mormon section of Mrs
Ferris’s book with her husband’s before these join
her non-Mormon sections suggests the possibility of
some collaboration between Mr and Mrs Ferris.
Although analyses based on other numbers of
words vary somewhat, most of the known pairs
cluster in most analyses and the Wards never cluster
with Mrs Ferris.
Fig. 3 Thirty-five mixed texts, without M. Ward or
C. Ferris
Fig. 4 Thirty-nine mixed texts, with M. Ward or C. Ferris
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 473
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
6.3 A smaller narrative-only Mormon set
Turning in a new direction, we compare only the
Mormon section of The Mormons at Home with
other Mormon texts, limit ourselves to narrative
by deleting all dialogue, and divide the texts into
sections of about 6,500 words. All analyses based
on the 300–800 MFW are very similar to that
shown in Fig. 5, based on the 700 MFW:
Williams’s texts form a separate main cluster, and
the Ward texts form a single cluster in which there is
some intermingling of sections from the two texts;
all other pairs or groups of sections by a single
author cluster correctly. In only one analysis,
based on the 900 MFW, does the cluster containing
Mr and Mrs Ferris’s text join in a single larger clus-
ter with the one containing Austin and Maria
Wards’ texts. Even there, the two clusters are not
very similar, and the analysis based on the 990 MFW
returns to the pattern shown in Fig. 5. The upshot of
all these tests is that they do not suggest that Mrs
Ferris wrote A Female Life, but they again suggest
that Maria and Austin Ward are the same person.
What is especially telling is the mingling of
sections by Maria and Austin Ward, which shows
that their texts are very similar. Such mingling is
relatively unusual even in cases of two texts by a
single author.
6.4 Delta analysis
Although Delta analysis is problematic here because
of the complexity of the case, a series of analyses
with different configurations of primary and sec-
ondary authors points in the same direction. Mrs
Ferris is never strongly identified as the most likely
author for A Female Life. She is sometimes identi-
fied as the most likely author of Male Life, but only
when Maria Ward is not included among the pri-
mary authors. In fact, when either of the Wards is
included among the primary authors, he or she is
regularly and strongly identified as the author of the
other Ward text in the secondary set.
We report here only one of our tests, a Delta-Lz
(0.7) analysis with seventeen primary and seventeen
secondary texts–fourteen by authors in the primary
set. Male Life and The Mormons at Home are in the
primary and Female Life in the secondary set. We
analyze the 200, 300, . . . , 1,000, 1,500, 2,000, . . . ,
4,000 MFW, no pronouns, culled at 70% (see
Burrows, 2002, Hoover, 2004a,b for discussion). In
each of the twelve analyses up to the 2,500 MFW,
there are only two or three errors, a total of thirty-
three in all, involving just four different texts. There
are two errors (600 and 700 MFW) for Angel Agnes,
three errors (200, 300 and 400 MFW) for Cecil
Dream, seven errors for The Blunders of a Bashful
Man (200, 300, 400, 1,000–2,500 MFW), nine errors
for the beginning of B. G. Ferris’s Utah and the
Mormons (500–2,500 MFW), and twelve errors for
St. John’s The Trapper’s Bride (200–2,500 MFW).
Leaving aside the five relatively isolated errors for
Angel Agnes and Cecil Dream, the rest of the errors
are intriguing. The Blunders of a Bashful Man,
a dime novel, was actually published under theFig. 5 Nine Mormon-related texts, narrative only
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
474 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
name Walter Gray. Although this is thought to be a
pseudonym of Metta Victor, the authorship of such
ephemeral novels is very confused and uncertain; her
other novel in this analysis, The Senator’s Son, is uni-
versally attributed to her. Furthermore, the attribu-
tion of the beginning of B. G. Ferris’s book (which
relates the journey to Utah and discusses its geogra-
phy) to Mrs Ferris accords with the cluster analysis
in Fig. 4, and may be the result of collaboration. The
twelve errors for St. John’s The Trapper’s Bride are
even more interesting: this novel is incorrectly attrib-
uted in all of our Delta analyses. The attribution to
St. John of Jessie, The Mormon’s Daughter (1861) (his
novel in the primary set), however, may rest on a
confusion. Jessie was anonymously published except
for the notation, ‘By the author of The Blue Dwarf,’
and, while St. John did publish a book by this title in
1870, there was an earlier (1861) novel with this title
by Lady Esther Hope (also a pseudonym). With the
Delta-Lz analysis even more reliable than the results
initially suggest, the attribution of Female Life to
Austin Ward in all analyses from the 200 to the
4,000 MFW, with Delta-Z scores of three or higher
in the most accurate analyses, strongly confirms the
implication of the cluster analyses. It seems very
likely that Austin and Maria Ward are two pseudo-
nyms for the same person, who is not likely to be Mrs
Ferris.
6.5 t-tests
The results presented above already seem to us
strong evidence that Mrs Ferris is not the author
of Female Life and that Austin and Maria Ward
are the same person. Given the non-ideal nature
of the problem, however, it seems worthwhile to
examine some further approaches using t-testing.
At first glance, t-testing seems problematic for this
case. In a classic and often cited article, Burrows
(1992) uses t-tests to distinguish Austen from
James, but he begins his hypothetical authorship
problem with the knowledge that the anonymous
text is by either James or Austen. This allows him
to use t-tests on the combined vocabularies of
groups of James and Austen texts to identify a
set of words that strongly differentiate the two
authors—a set that can then be used to test which
author is likeliest to have written the anonymous
text. In the present case, we have only three texts,
ostensibly by three authors, and only the attribution
of The Mormons at Home to Mrs Ferris is beyond
question.
Nevertheless, we believe that some additional
progress in this and other similar difficult cases is
possible by performing three different sets of t-tests.
We select two of our three texts and assume that
they are by different authors, use t-tests to identify
words that strongly differentiate them, and then test
the third text against this set of words. We follow
the same procedure for the other two possible pairs
of texts and compare the results. For this procedure
to make sense, however, we need to know what to
expect if each set of initial assumptions is correct
and what to expect if it is incorrect. We begin, there-
fore, with sets of known texts for each of the three
possibilities, where the three texts are by one, two,
or three authors.
6.5.1 Three texts by the same author
In this scenario, any assumption of a difference in
authorship will obviously be false. Our first test on
three texts by a single author involves sections of
13,000–22,000 words of Robert Louis Stevenson’s
Kidnapped, Treasure Island, and The Master of
Ballantrae, roughly the size of the Mormon part of
The Mormons at Home. (We avoid The Dynamiter
from our Mormon set because it was jointly written
by Fanny Stevenson.) We begin by assuming that
Kidnapped and Treasure Island are by different
authors and use t-tests to identify the words that
are most effective in differentiating the two texts.
Dividing the two texts into ten sections of about
1,350 words each and t-testing the 3,000 MFW
yields forty-six words with P < 0.05. We add The
Master of Ballantrae as an unknown, divide the
three novels into 4,000-word sections, and perform
a principal components analysis (PCA) based on
these forty-six words (see Fig. 6). The Master of
Ballantrae, though grouped between the test texts,
is not obviously distinguished from Kidnapped.3
The very small number of discriminating words
and the relatively small scale of the graph result
partly from the shortness of the texts, but they
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 475
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
also reflect the fact that the test is being asked to
distinguish two texts by the same author, texts that
are apparently quite similar.
The second test of three texts by the same author
involves David Graham Phillips’s The Conflict, The
Grain of Dust, and The Price She Paid, in this case
using the whole novels (about 100,000 words each)
and assuming that The Conflict and The Grain of
Dust are by different authors. Testing the 3,000
most frequent words for discriminators yields 233
words with P < 0.05 (thirteen sections of 7,000
words). A PCA of the three novels (10,000-word
sections) groups Price between the test texts (see
Fig. 7). These longer texts produce a larger
number of discriminating words and the separa-
tion is clearer between the two original novels
and the unknown. The range is also somewhat
wider, and the novels are separate on both the
first and the second component (barely on the
latter).
The final test of three texts by a single author
involves Glasgow’s The Deliverance, Life and
Gabriella, and Virginia, using the complete novels
(about 125,000–150,000 words) and assuming that
Deliverance and Gabriella are by different authors.
Testing the 3,000 most frequent words for
discriminators yields 662 words with P < 0.05 (eigh-
teen sections of 7,500 words). A PCA of the three
novels (10,000-word sections), shown in Fig. 8, gen-
erally separates Virginia and Gabriella on compo-
nent two, but, as in Fig. 6, there is considerable
intermingling. Adding The Wheel of Life to the
same analysis as an additional unknown crowds
Virginia and Gabriella closer together, and produces
a tight, distinct Wheel cluster. There are a great
many discriminating words and the scale is quite
large on the first component. This analysis suggests
that Deliverance is quite different from the other
two novels and that those two are quite similar
to each other. This is confirmed by redoing the
analysis assuming Gabriella and Virginia are differ-
ent. This analysis yields only 327 discriminator
words and a PCA produces a graph very similar to
that in Fig. 7.
These results suggest that, if Mrs Ferris wrote
Female Life, Male Life, and The Mormons at Home,
it may be difficult to tell. With long texts, there is
enough variation available so that there can be a
large number of discriminators and a large range
on the first principal component even when all
three texts are by the same author. Furthermore,
the results can differ a great deal even if there is
Fig. 6 Stevenson: Treasure Island versus Kidnapped, with Ballantrae unknown
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
476 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
only one author involved, depending on how simi-
lar the two texts are that are assumed to be by the
same author. So far as we know, no one has ever
suggested that Mrs Ferris also wrote Male Life, but,
given the problem of pseudonyms, we must allow
for this possibility.
6.5.2 Three texts by two authors
With three texts by two authors, one assumption of
difference will be correct and the other incorrect,
and the results of our analysis should be recogniz-
ably different for the two assumptions (there
are actually two different correct assumptions).
Fig. 8 Glasgow: Gabriella versus Deliverance, with Virginia unknown
Fig. 7 Phillips: Conflict versus Grain, with Price unknown
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 477
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The first test of three texts by two authors involves
two texts by Kane, Twelve Mormon Homes and
A Gentile Account of Life in Utah’s Dixie, and the
Mormon part of Mrs Ferris’s The Mormons at
Home, first with the two Kane texts assumed to be
by different authors. Testing the 1,500 MFW yields
only nineteen words with P < 0.05 (eight sections of
1,600 words). A PCA of these texts (2,600-word
sections) groups The Mormons at Home between
the two test texts but not separately from them
(see Fig. 9). Note the small number of discriminat-
ing words and the small range on component one.
Clearly the shortness of these texts affects these
characteristics (the Kane texts are only about
13,000 words each), but the main issue seems to
be that the t-tests discover a few words that distin-
guish two very similar texts by Kane, but these are
not sufficient to distinguish Ferris from Kane.
Knowing that the tests are based on a false assump-
tion, there is no reason to expect that they should.
Using the same texts, but assuming that Kane’s
Twelve Mormon Homes and Ferris’s The Mormons
at Home are by different authors, shows quite a dif-
ferent pattern. Testing the 1,500 MFW yields fifty-
five words with P < 0.05 (nine sections of 1,500
words). A PCA of these texts (2,600-word sections)
separates Kane’s Gentile Account distinctly from The
Mormons at Home, but not from Kane’s other text,
Twelve Mormon Homes (see Fig. 10). Note the larger
number of discriminating words and the larger
range on component one, showing how much
more difference there is between the two authors
than between the two Kane texts. The alternate cor-
rect assumption, testing Kane’s Gentile Account
against The Mormons at Home the same way,
yields forty-nine discriminating words; a PCA pro-
duces a pattern very similar to that in Fig. 10. (We
will not test the second correct assumptions below.)
Our second test of three texts by two authors
involves Phillips’s The Conflict and The Grain of
Dust, and Maria Ward’s Female Life, first with
Phillips’s texts assumed different. Testing the 3,000
MFW for discriminators yields 233 words with
P < 0.05 (thirteen sections of 7,000 words). A PCA
of these novels (10,000-word sections) groups the
sections of Female Life in a separate cluster, distinct
from the two Phillips novels on both the first and
second principal component (see Fig. 11). Using the
same three texts, we next assume that The Conflict
and Female Life are by different authors. Testing the
3,000 MFW yields 613 words with P < 0.05 (fifteen
sections of 6,700 words). A PCA of the novels
Fig. 9 Kane and C. Ferris: Twelve versus Gentile, with Mormons at Home unknown
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
478 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(10,000-word sections) widely separates Female Life
from the two Phillips novels on PC1, but separates
the two Phillips novels only on PC2 (see Fig. 12).
Note that the correct assumption here produces
more than twice as many discriminating words
and a much larger scale on the first component.
In spite of the fact that the two Phillips novels
were easy to differentiate, the words that distinguish
Female Life and Conflict also do an excellent job of
distinguishing Female Life and Grain.
Fig. 10 Kane and C. Ferris: Twelve versus Mormons at Home, with Gentile unknown
Fig. 11 Phillips and M. Ward: Conflict versus Grain, with Female Life unknown
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 479
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Our final test of three texts by two authors
involves Grey’s The Rainbow Trail and Riders of
the Purple Sage and Phillips’s The Conflict, first
with Grey’s texts assumed different. Testing the
3,000 MFW for discriminators yields 275 words
with P < 0.05 (thirteen sections of 7,500 words).
A PCA of these novels (10,000-word sections)
groups them in three widely separate clusters, with
The Conflict distinct on both component one and
two, as shown in Fig. 13. Note the relatively small
number of discriminators and the relatively small
range on component one, given the length of the
texts. In contrast, testing the 3,000 MFW of Conflict
and Riders for discriminators yields 677 words
(more than twice as many as when the two
Phillips texts were assumed different) with P < 0.05
(fifteen sections each of 6,400 words). Again, a PCA
of these novels (10,000-word sections) widely sepa-
rates Grey’s novels from Conflict, but the two Grey
novels intermingle thoroughly (see Fig. 14), and the
range on component one is far larger than in Fig. 13.
These results reflect Grey’s rather formulaic style
and perhaps also the fact that Rainbow is a sequel
to Riders.
The results for all the scenarios in which two of
the three texts are by one author suggest that it may
be possible to use information about the size of the
list of discriminating words and the range on com-
ponent one to support an argument for the attribu-
tion of the texts. That is, if the texts are tested in two
different ways, texts by different authors tend to
produce larger numbers of discriminators and a
larger range on component one than texts by the
same author. A closer look at Figs 9–14 also shows
that, when an incorrect assumption of difference is
made, there is a much larger proportion of variance
in the second component. That is, when two texts
by the same author are assumed to be by different
authors, testing a third author’s text naturally
increases the amount of variance captured by com-
ponent two, which is actually measuring the true
authorship difference. When texts by different
authors are used for the t-tests and a text by one
of them is tested with PCA, a much larger propor-
tion of the total variance is captured in the first, the
authorship component, leaving the second compo-
nent to capture the smaller intra-authorial
differences.
6.5.3 Three texts by three authors
In this scenario, an assumption of authorial differ-
ence between any two texts will be correct. Our first
Fig. 12 Phillips and M. Ward: Conflict versus Female Life, with Grain unknown
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
480 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
test involves Maria Ward’s Female Life, Stenhouse’s
Tell it All, and Belisle’s The Prophets, first with Ward
and Stenhouse assumed different. Testing the
3,000 MFW of Female Life and Tell it All for dis-
criminators yields 681 words with P < 0.05 (seven-
teen sections of 7,800 words). A PCA of these texts
(10,000-word sections) shows The Prophets in a dis-
tinct cluster between the other two on the first com-
ponent and very distinct on the second, as shown in
Fig. 15. Note again the large number of discrimina-
tors and the large range on both components.
Testing these three texts in the other two possible
Fig. 13 Grey and Phillips: Rainbow versus Riders, with Conflict unknown
Fig. 14 Grey and Phillips: Rainbow versus Conflict, with Riders unknown
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 481
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
configurations gives extremely similar results, with
about 600 discriminating words, a large range on
both components, and a clear separation of the
three texts. Two other sets of three texts by three
authors produce the same predictable pattern and
need not be discussed further, but a final set invol-
ving Mrs Ferris deserves a brief comment. Testing
the 3,000 MFW of The Mormons at Home against
Victor’s Mormon Wives for discriminators yields 448
words with P < 0.05 (thirteen sections of 4,200
words). The pattern shown in Fig. 16 is similar to
that in Fig. 15, except that the two sections of
C. Ferris that closely correspond to the Mormon
part are pulled toward Young, and, to a lesser
extent, toward Victor.
6.5.4 Maria Ward, Austin Ward, Mrs Ferris,
and the authorship of Female Life
We are now ready for tests on Female Life, Male Life,
and The Mormons at Home, and we begin by assum-
ing Austin Ward and Maria Ward are different.
Testing the 3,000 MFW of Female Life and Male
Life for discriminators yields 224 words with
P < 0.05 (sixteen sections of 4,300 words). A PCA
of these novels (roughly 9,500-word sections)
separates The Mormons at Home from Female Life
on the first component, but from Male Life only on
the second component, with the Mormon sections
very close to Male Life (see Fig. 17). By itself, this
graph suggests that Ferris might have written or
influenced Male Life, but it does not suggest any
connection between her and Female Life.
The other two assumptions of difference stud-
ied in the same way produce the very similar
results seen in Figs 18 and 19. (Both analyses
test the 3,000 MFW in thirteen sections of 4,200
words; each PCA uses sections of about 9,500
words.) In both cases, Ferris is quite separate from
the Wards, whose texts intermingle, and the
Mormon sections of The Mormons at Home
are pulled toward the Wards, especially toward
Male Life.
As we have seen in several analyses above, the
Mormon third of Ferris’s book naturally shows
more affinity to other Mormon-related texts than
the travel sections at the beginning and end; there-
fore, for a final set of tests, we limit ourselves to the
Mormon part of The Mormons at Home (about
19,000 words). Second, because The Mormons
at Home is almost wholly narration, while the
two Ward novels have a great deal of dialogue,
Fig. 15 Ward, Stenhouse, Belisle: Female Life versus Tell It All, with Prophets unknown
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
482 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
we restrict the analysis to narrative, removing
the few hundred words of dialogue from The
Mormons at Home, and then extracting about
27,000 words of pure narration from Female Life
and Male Life (concentrating on long narrative
passages).
When we assume that Maria Ward and Austin
Ward are different, testing the 2,000 MFW of
Female Life and Male Life for discriminators yields
fifty-two words with P < 0.05 (twelve sections
of 2,050 words). A PCA of the novels (4,800-word
sections) places The Mormons at Home in a cluster
Fig. 16 C. Ferris, Victor, Young: Mormons Home versus Mormon Wives, with Wife 19 unknown
Fig. 17 M. Ward, A. Ward, C. Ferris: Female Life versus Male Life, with Mormons Home unknown
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 483
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
that is distinct from the Ward texts on both com-
ponents (see Fig. 20). For comparison, if we replace
The Mormons at Home with Young’s Wife Number
19 and perform a PCA (4,800-word sections) with
the same fifty-two words, sections of Wife Number
19 overlap slightly with the other two texts on com-
ponent one and are much less distinct on compo-
nent two, showing that Mrs Ferris is less like the
Wards than Young is, at least with respect to these
fifty-two words. The large proportion of variance in
Fig. 18 M. Ward, A. Ward, C. Ferris: Male Life versus Mormons Home, with Female Life unknown
Fig. 19 M. Ward, A. Ward, C. Ferris: Female Life versus Mormons Home, with Male Life unknown
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
484 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the second component in Fig. 20 and the fact that
there are only fifty-two discriminator words, even
with these relatively long texts, again suggest that
the Wards are one person.
Finally, assuming Austin Ward and Mrs Ferris
are different and testing the 2,000 MFW of Male
Life and The Mormons at Home for discriminators
yields seventy-two words with P < 0.05 (eight sec-
tions of 2,400 words). For Maria Ward and Mrs
Ferris the same kind of analysis yields ninety-
nine words P < 0.05. For both scenarios, a PCA
(4,800-word sections) widely separates Ferris from
the Wards, but the sections of Female Life and Male
Life intermingle (see Figs 21 and 22). The larger
number of discriminators and the much smaller
proportion of variance in the second component
compared with Fig. 20 again suggests the Wards
are one person and that Mrs Ferris is not likely to
be that person. In spite of our removal of two
sources of possible non-authorial difference (lim-
iting ourselves to narrative and to the Mormon-
related part of Ferris’s book, which was pulled
toward other Mormon-related texts above), Ferris
remains distinct from both Wards, making this ana-
lysis seem especially persuasive.
7. Conclusion
We believe that the results above provide very
strong evidence that Mrs Ferris did not write
Female Life, but that whoever did so also wrote
Male Life. This conclusion is based on the entire
series of tests. First, cluster analysis of first-person
Mormon-related texts groups Maria and Austin
Ward over a wide range of analyses, but does not
group Mrs Ferris and Maria Ward. This remains
true when we add more texts, both first-person
and third-person texts, and both Mormon-related
and not. This larger set includes many pairs of
texts by the same author, which allows us to select
the range of analyses that are most accurate on the
known texts for testing our Ferris and Ward texts.
In effect, we use pairs of texts by known authors as
proxies for the additional texts we would like to
have had by our target authors. We also get confir-
matory results when test only the narrative (divided
into sections) of a smaller group of first-person
texts, including our target authors. This analysis
consistently groups the sections of texts by the
same author, again groups the two Wards together,
but does not group Mrs. Ferris and Maria Ward.
Fig. 20 M. Ward, A. Ward, C. Ferris: Ward versus Ward, with Ferris unknown
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 485
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The fact that the sections of the two Ward books
intermingle seems to strongly support the proposi-
tion that the two Wards are the same person. Delta
analysis, in which we test with various configura-
tions of our target authors in the primary and sec-
ondary sets, strongly points in the same direction.
Finally, a series of t-tests on three texts by one,
two, and three known authors with both correct and
incorrect assumptions of difference shows that, not
surprisingly, t-tests based on correct assumptions of
authorship difference produce much larger numbers
of discriminating words than those based on
Fig. 22 M. Ward, A. Ward, C. Ferris: A. Ward versus Ferris, with A. Ward unknown
Fig. 21 M. Ward, A. Ward, C. Ferris: A. Ward versus Ferris, with M. Ward unknown
D. L. Hoover and S. Hess
486 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
incorrect assumptions. Performing PCA based on
the various sets of discriminating words shows fur-
ther that, for any given group of texts, word sets
based on incorrect assumptions produce graphs
with narrower ranges of values on the first principal
component and with much larger proportions of
variance in the second component. With three
texts, contrasting correct and incorrect assumptions
is obviously only possible when there are two
authors involved: with one author, all assumptions
of difference are incorrect, with three, all are correct.
In this non-ideal authorship problem, our three
texts strongly mirror the results on known texts
involving two authors rather than one or three.
However, rather than confirming the long-standing
tentative attribution of Female Life to Mrs Ferris,
our analysis strongly attributes Female Life and
Male Life to a single author who is not Mrs Ferris.
However bigoted The Mormons at Home shows Mrs
Ferris to be, we can confidently, if not conclusively,
acquit her of responsibility for Female Life. We
believe that this kind of approach should be of use
in other non-ideal authorship attribution problems.
During the course of our investigation, and
because of it, we uncovered one additional strong
piece of traditional evidence that Mrs Ferris is not
the author of Female Life. Some early analyses with
texts divided into sections showed that some sec-
tions of Fanny Stenhouse’s Tell it All fail to group
with the rest. Besides alerting us to the presence of
Mary Burton’s story, purportedly in her own words,
this discovery led us to look at Stenhouse’s book
more closely. Tell it All is a well-known first-
person nonfictional account actually written by an
ex-Mormon. It is what Female Life only claims to be.
Following a preface by Harriet Beecher Stowe,
Stenhouse’s own preface comments on two previous
books claiming to be by ex-Mormons, though with-
out naming them. The first is probably Nelson
Winch Green’s Fifteen Years Among the Mormons
(1860). Stenhouse says the second was ‘first pub-
lished nearly twenty years ago,’ and describes it as
follows:
This book was first published by a New York
firm, and being supposed by the innocent
public to be genuine, it had an extraordinary
circulation—forty or fifty thousand being
sold. The publishers, however, failed, and the
stereotype plates passed into other hands.
Subsequently the work having come under
the notice of a subscription firm at Hartford,
they negotiated for the use of the plates. One
word of the heading of each page was cut out,
a new title was selected, some old illustrations
and a few new ones were added, and an
ancient steel-plate portrait, which had once
done duty in some book of poetry or illu-
strated volume of fashionable beauties of
years ago, was vamped up, and the supposed
signature of the fictitious author was engraved
beneath it. This book, now re-christened, and
apparently a new volume, was launched upon
the market. It is at the present moment adver-
tised in many local newspapers, and the con-
fiding public cheerfully buy it under the
impression that it is the genuine production
of a Mormon woman. Such is the history of
some of the so-called autobiographies which
have appeared. (Stenhouse, 1875, p. xii)
This description perfectly matches Female Life,
which was published in New York in 1855, ‘nearly
twenty years’ before Stenhouse’s book (the original
copyright is 1874). It was republished in 1872 and
again in 1873 as The Mormon Wife by the Hartford
Publishing Company (Ward, 1872). Although Maria
Ward is still not named explicitly as the author of
this edition, her signature does appear, as Stenhouse
describes it, under a ‘vamped up’ picture of her, and
the running head (normally the book’s title) appears
as ‘Life Among the Mormons,’ with the word
‘Female’ removed from the original edition’s
‘Female Life Among the Mormons.’ The true
author of Female Life, and almost certainly Male
Life as well, may never be known, but the careful
detail Stenhouse gives about the later edition of
Female Life leads us to believe that she herself did
know who wrote it. We wish that Mrs Stenhouse
had followed her own injunction to ‘tell it all,’
rather than leaving us with the following tantalizing,
but still anonymous, attribution of Female Life
Among the Mormons:
It was professedly written by the wife of a
Mormon elder; but it was really the
An exercise in non-ideal authorship attribution
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 24, No. 4, 2009 487
 at U
B Leipzig-Zw
st G
eistes - U
nd on January 17, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
production of an old lady in New Jersey, who
had never even been out to Utah, and who
drew entirely upon her own imagination for
all that she could not adapt from other sensa-
tional writers on Mormonism. (p. xii)
