Introduction
The study of intertextuality, the shaping of a text’s
meaning by other texts, remains a labor-intensive
process for the literary critic. Julia Kristeva, who
coined the term intertext, suggested, ‘Any text is
constructed as a mosaic of quotations; any text is
the absorption and transformation of another’
(Kristeva, 1986, p. 37). Such transformations
range from direct quotations, representing a
simple and overt intertextuality, to more complex
references that are intentionally or subconsciously
absorbed into a text. In the years since Kristeva
first drew attention to the phenomenon, the field
of its study has become increasingly—in some
cases debilitatingly—complex, as a recent study
in this journal showed (Trillini and Quassdorf,
2010). As this theoretical complexity grows, so
does the burden upon the practicing philologist
to verify suspected instances of intertextuality.
The critic must command a large corpus of pos-
sible contributing works; meanwhile, objective cri-
teria by which intertext may be measured are
lacking. Since, in many cases, the problem is
one of pattern recognition, the task of locating
new relationships between texts and validating
suspected ones is a good candidate for automated
assistance by computers.
Correspondence:
Christopher W. Forstall,
338 MFAC, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo NY 14621,
USA.
E-mail: forstall@buffalo.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
285
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr029 Advance Access published on 30 May 2011
In this work, we propose the use of machine
learning and related statistical methods to improve
the process by which intertextuality is studied.
Specifically, we bring to bear computational tech-
niques from the field of authorship attribution in
order to examine instances where an author who is
familiar with a particular corpus deliberately or sub-
consciously reflects this in discrete passages within
his own work. We have defined three different
classes of style markers to quantify intertext: phon-
etic, metric, and dictional.
To evaluate the proposed style markers and clas-
sification methods, we have chosen an intriguing
case study in Latin poetry. Traditional philological
analysis suggests that Paul the Deacon’s eighth cen-
tury CE poem Angustae Vitae has a strong connec-
tion to classical Roman poetry of the first centuries
BCE and CE, and specifically to the works of
Catullus. Using the digital methods outlined
above, we attempt to replicate and quantify this
intertextual reading of Paul, with a view to develop-
ing more sensitive methods for detecting intertext
with the computer.
2 Paul the Deacon’s Angustae
Vitae and a Hypothesized Link
to Catullus
Paul the Deacon was an eighth century monk and
an intellectual, a court poet and historian of the
Lombards and briefly of Charlemagne (Harrington
et al., 1997, 197). Although today he is better known
for his historical and antiquarian work, his poetic
output shows that he took an intellectual interest in
matters of poetics: he engaged in friendly competi-
tion with contemporary men of letters, such as Peter
of Pisa, he discussed classical authors in his verses,
and he incorporated into his poems virtuoso tricks
popular in his time, such as acrostic messages. He
wrote verse both in the classical literary tradition
and in the style of contemporary spoken Latin.
This article considers in particular the poem begin-
ning Angustae vitae . . . (Poem 5 in the edition of
Du¨mmler, 1881), an epistolary poem in which
Paul juxtaposes poetic inspiration and production
in the classical world with the writing of poetry in
the Christian monastic context.
Although Paul posits the classical and monastic
worlds as opposites, he uses diction and thematic
models which recall the so-called Neoteric poets of
the late Roman republic and their successors of the
early empire: the poet/lover, his beloved, and his
poetological concerns. Paul re-contextualizes this
model to reflect monastic love and poetic exchange.
We know from his other writings that he was
well-versed in the poetry of Horace, Virgil and
Ovid, and others have noted possible classical inter-
texts in this poem (e.g. Du¨mmler, 1881, on line
5.19). Here we argue that in several places his style
is particularly reminiscent of Catullus. Although it is
generally believed that Paul did not have knowledge
of Catullus’ poetry, in this work we make the as-
sumption that he had, based on as-yet unpublished
evidence brought forward by one of our authors.1
For the present, we use digital analysis to support
and quantify a traditional, subjective reading. As
we refine the digital metrics introduced here, our
eventual goal is to augment the capabilities of the
web-based allusion-detection tool Tesserae (Coffee,
2010).
We begin with a brief survey of Paul’s twenty-
line poem, identifying the places in which trad-
itional philology suggests connections to Catullus.
To furnish a control, we also identify places where
connections to other classical poets are generally
accepted. The principal question we address is: can
the tools of authorship attribution be employed to
validate or at least quantify subjective, literary
claims about intertext?
3 An Intertextual Reading of
Angustae Vitae
We begin with the text of Paul’s poem:
Angustae vitae fugiunt consortia Musae,
Claustrorum septis nec habitare volunt,
Per rosulenta magis cupiunt sed ludere prata,
Pauperiem fugiunt, deliciasque colunt:
Quapropter nobis aversae terga dederunt, 5
Et comitem spernunt me vocitare suum.
Inde est quod vobis inculta poemata mitto,
C. W. Forstall et al.
286 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
Suscipe sed libens qualiacumque tamen.
Inmodico flagrat de vestro pectus amore,
Crede pater, nostrum, semper amande mihi, 10
Et peream, si non tecum captare per aevum
Per domini munus regna beata volo.
Hoc mihi est votum, hoc fido pectore spero,
Hoc licet indignus nocte dieque precor.
Tu quoque, si felix vigeas de munere Christi,— 15
Namque potes—misero redde, beate, vicem.
Ante potest flavos Hrenus repedare Suavos,
Ad fontem et versis pergere Tibris aquis,
Quam tuus e nostro labatur pectore vultus,
Ore colende mihi tempus in omne pater! 20
(The Muses flee the societies of the constrained life,
Nor wish to inhabit the gardens of cloisters;
Rather they desire to play in rosy meadows.
They flee from poverty; they cultivate delights;
So they turn their backs, averse to me,
And disdain to call me their companion.
Thus it is I send my uncultivated poems to you;
But receive them, such as they are, with good will.
My breast burns with unrestrained love for you—
Father ever beloved to me, trust that
I shall perish unless I wish at last to reach with you
The blessed kingdom, by the gift of the Lord.
This is my vow; for this I hope with a faithful heart;
Though undeserving, I pray for this night and day.
And you, if you should be well and flourishing by the
gift of Christ,
Send a poor wretch a reply, fortunate one—for
certainly you are able.
The Rhine will be able to turn from the blond
Swabians
And Tiber, with his waters reversed, proceed toward
his source
Before your image will slip from my heart,
Father worthy to be remembered on my lips for all time.
—Paul the Deacon, Poem 5 in Du¨mmler, 1881, with
our own translation.)
As the poem opens, we learn that the Muses do not
wish to live in the fenced-in gardens of monasteries,
but rather they desire to play in rosy meadows. Here,
septa, the cultivated, enclosed garden of a monastery,
is contrasted with the rosulenta prata, a wild, open
meadow. These lines may reference Eclogue 1 of Virgil
(Mynors, 1969) where ludere (‘to play’), fugere (‘to
flee’), and pauper (‘poor’) all play important roles;
lines 17–18 also allude to Virgil’s Eclogue 1—indeed
to one of the most famous adynata in Latin literature
(Ec. 1.59–63; noted by Du¨mmler, 1881, ad loc.). Thus,
knowledge of Virgil colors the reader’s understand-
ing of the opening.
However, reading Paul’s opening with Catullus
provides a richer understanding of the themes of the
poem. What the Muses desire in Angustae Vitae are
cornerstones of Catullan diction. In particular,
Paul’s lines 2–3 recall lines 1–2 of Catullus’ Poem
2 (Kroll, 1960) in which a woman plays with a pet
sparrow: Passer, deliciae meae puellae / quicum
ludere . . . [solet] (‘O sparrow, the pet of my mistress,
with whom [she is accustomed] to play . . .’). Paul’s
Muses desire to play in fields (cupiunt sed ludere
prata) and to tend to (colunt) their delights (deli-
cias), just as Catullus’ lover is accustomed to play
(ludere solet) with her pet (deliciae). Ludere (‘to
play’), furthermore, is a by-word in Catullus for
both sexual activity and the production of poetry
(see, for example, Poem 50.2).
The classical Muses, connected with elegiac,
erotic love, are juxtaposed with the object of
Paul’s chaste, Christian love, a Benedictine Father.
In line 9 he says that his heart blazes with love
(flagrat . . . amore) for his friend. This expression,
though recontextualized here, has classical sources,
which color and give weight to the idea of love as
the source of poetry. Virgil’s Dido famously ‘burned
with love,’ flammavit amore (Aeneid 4.54). Virgil
does not, however, directly pair flagrare with
amor. It is Catullus who provides the most telling
consequences of ‘blazing with love.’ In Catullus’
Poem 67, a man is described using just these
words: mens caeco flagrabat amore (‘his mind was
blazing with a blind love,’ 67.25). In Catullus’ Poem
68, Laodamia enters her husband’s house flagrans
amore (‘blazing with love,’ 68.73). This immoderate
love is highly problematic for Catullus: the poems
cited imply that it leads, in the first case, to sexual
violence and, in the second, to disastrous neglect for
religious rites. For Paul, the opposite is the case. His
love for the addressee is what allows him to attain
the heavenly kingdom (11–12). Paul has taken a
negatively charged trope in classical literature and
made its ramifications positive by transposing it to a
Christian context.
Angustae Vitae considers not just the creation of
poetry, but specifically poetic exchange. In line 16,
Investigating Paul the Deacon’s Angustae Vitae
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 287
Paul asks the addressee to send him a poem in
return: redde . . . vicem. This line has a parallel in
Ovid, who says at Amores 1.6.23 (Kenney, 1961),
redde vicem meritis (‘give back in turn to those
who deserve’). The phrasing characterizes literary
creativity as a form of exchange. Examination of
Catullus’ Poem 50, also an epistolary poem on the
subject of literary creativity, illuminates this prac-
tice. In this poem, addressed to his friend and fellow
poet, Calvus, Catullus emphasizes the reciprocal
character of poetic writing, also using the verb
reddo (‘return, give back, pay back’). Paul, like
Catullus, is beseeching his addressee to participate
in poetic exchange. Without a reply, Paul is misero
(‘wretched’). In Poem 50, Catullus describes himself
as me miserum (‘wretched me’). For both poets,
being away from literary inspiration and without a
reciprocal exchange of a poem leads to misery.
Paul offers his poems to his friend with disarm-
ing modesty: suscipe . . . qualiacumque (8, ‘take
them, such as they are’). The attitude and diction
here recall Catullus Poem 1, in which he offers a
small book to his friend Cornelius: habe . . .
qualecumque (1.8–9, ‘have [it], such as it is’). Yet
in both cases this modesty is immediately undercut
by a claim to a literary legacy. For Catullus, perman-
ence depends on the Muse. In his final line he asks
her, o patrona virgo/plus uno maneat perenne saeclo
(‘O patron maid, may [my book] remain enduring
more than an age’ 1.9–10). Paul, too, wishes to gain
the heavenly kingdom per aevum (11, ‘for an age’),
and claims he will continue to praise his friend
tempus in omne (20, ‘for all time’). For Paul, how-
ever, the guarantor of permanence is not the Muse,
but the domini munus (12, ‘the gift of the Lord’).
4 Methodology and Feature Sets
for Intertextual Analysis
In order to assess the statistical evidence of Catullan
influence in Angustae Vitae, we prepared a variety of
texts for processing. For Paul’s poems, our texts
were transcribed from Du¨mmler (1881). All other
Latin texts were retrieved from the Tesserae web site
(Coffee, 2010). In addition to Paul and Catullus,
we also processed texts from five other Latin
poets. The Elegies of Tibullus and Propertius were
chosen for their elegiac style, which is often remin-
iscent of Catullus. Ovid’s Amores and Book Four
of Virgil’s Aeneid were chosen for their intertextual
relationship to Angustae Vitae, described above.
Horace’s Epistles were chosen as a negative test,
with no overt stylistic similarity to Catullus, nor
any identified intertextual relationship to Angustae
Vitae. Each feature set was generated using a series
of Perl scripts written specifically for this work, with
a supporting machine-learning package applied
where necessary.
4.1 Open set attribution
In traditional authorship attribution (Diederich
et al., 2003), classification experiments have most
often taken the form of closed set attribution,
where all works considered are hypothesized to
belong to some finite set of authors for which clas-
sifiers exist. An alternative open set approach is to
presume that any work from any author can be
considered for classification using a classifier for a
known author. Unlike the closed set scenario, open
set attribution is not constrained by any a priori
assumptions made on the testing data. Open set
attribution has been applied successfully to docu-
ment classification (Manevit and Yousef, 2001),
and attribution for English language novelists and
Rabbinical Hebrew writing (Koppel and Schler,
2004; Koppel et al., 2007). We can extend this
idea to the study of stylistic similarity; our goal,
however, is not to attribute authorship, but to attri-
bute influence.
For this work, we want to test the stylistic simi-
larity of any poet to Catullus. Thus, we require only
a single influence classifier trained on representative
samples from Catullus. Ideally, samples from poets
with any stylistic similarity to Catullus (such as
Tibullus and Propertius, fellow elegists of the late
republic and early empire) will receive a positive
score, while all others will receive a negative score
(see Fig. 1). A one-class support vector machine
trained on textual samples from Catullus that are
closest in our feature space to his Poems 1 and 2,
where much of the suspected intertext exists, pro-
vides us with the appropriate tool.
C. W. Forstall et al.
288 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
4.2 The functional n-gram feature
Our work in authorship and stylistic analysis has
considered the importance of phonetic style mark-
ers, with the observation that sound plays a funda-
mental role in an author’s style, particularly for
poets. To capture sound information, we have de-
veloped a feature that we call a functional n-gram
(Forstall and Scheirer, 2010), whereby the power of
the Zipfian distribution (Zipf, 1949) is realized by
selecting the n-grams that occur most frequently as
features, while preserving their relative probabilities
as the actual feature element. By using more
primitive, sound-oriented features—namely, char-
acter-level n-grams—we are able to build accurate
classifiers with the functional n-gram approach.
Pðenjen1nNþ1Þ ¼
Cðen1nNþ1enÞ
Cðen1nNþ1Þ
, freq ðen1nNþ1enÞ > 
The formula above expresses the functional n-gram
feature for any length n. For some character en, we
would like to know the probability of its occurrence
given a sequence of characters directly preceding it.
We calculate this probability by counting all in-
stances of the character string of length n, and divid-
ing by the count of the character string of length
n 1 preceding en. Most importantly, we consider
the resulting probability a feature if and only if the
frequency of the character string of length n exceeds
some threshold ’. This threshold limits our selec-
tion of n-grams to those at the farthest left of a
plotted Zipfian distribution (assuming the x axis is
organized from most frequent to least frequent).
This process is illustrated in Fig. 2.
4.3 The low-probability feature
At the word level, we use a style marker for diction
that is somewhat the opposite of the functional
n-gram approach. Considering the Zipfian distribu-
tion once again, we turn to elements that occur with
low probabilities. The power of functional n-grams
relies on the amount of information carried by the
elements at the left side of the Zipfian distribution.
Now we consider the right—features that occur in-
frequently, though not necessarily hapax legomena.
We fix a desired probability range for words that
occur infrequently, and look for n-gram sequences
composed of only those words in a particular pas-
sage, ignoring all others:
ðPlow < Prðword1Þ < PhighÞ . . . ðPlow < Prðword2Þ
< PhighÞ . . . ðPlow < PrðwordnÞ < PhighÞ
where n 3 in the above example. The probability
of the resulting n-gram is compared to pre-
computed probabilities of the same n-gram
Fig. 1 In authorship attribution, we typically consider a closed set problem. Here, we consider an open set problem,
where we want to test the stylistic similarity of any Latin poet to Catullus. A one-class SVM trained on textual samples
from Catullus that are closest in our feature space to Poems 1 and 2 provides us with the appropriate tool. Actual results
for our functional n-gram analysis are shown
Investigating Paul the Deacon’s Angustae Vitae
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 289
(should it exist) for specific authors, or literary
groups. This type of style marker is very well
suited to our case study, where certain word
sequences are common to a particular group
(Catullus and his elegiac successors), but uncom-
mon or non-existent in the work of other groups.
To compute the actual feature, a count C1 of
the chosen n-gram sequence must be calculated.
Following this, a second count C2 must be calcu-
lated from all other n-gram sequences starting with
word1 and bounded by Plow and Phigh. The final
probability feature is given by: C1/C2. If the se-
quence exists, it will have a very low probability,
otherwise, it receives a probability of 0; in most
texts, the target n-gram should not exist. This
feature can also be computed in a ‘commutative’
fashion (for a bi-gram: ‘word1 word2’ or ‘word2
word1’). The resulting probability features can be
used to augment the existing functional n-gram fea-
tures to train a more accurate one-class SVM.
4.4 The metrical feature
A third feature type, derived from syllabic quantity,
attempted to quantify larger scale patterns in the
poets’ use of meter. Paul wrote Angustae Vitae
in elegiac couplets, in imitation of his classical pre-
decessors, despite the fact that in the intervening
centuries the prosody of spoken Latin had changed
greatly. A couplet is composed of two lines of slight-
ly different prescriptions; in each the number and
quantities (‘lengths’) of syllables must conform to
one of a very limited set of patterns (Fig. 3). Barring
rare exceptions, there are sixteen possible forms for
the first line and four for the second. The quantity
of a syllable depends upon the length of the vowel
and the disposition of following consonants
Fig. 2 An overview of the functional n-gram process, which is designed to capture and express the most frequent
information in a sample of text. The above example is for characters, though the same process can be used for words
and metrical syllables as well
Fig. 3 The metrical quantities of syllables in an elegiac couplet. An obligatory long syllable is represented by a macron
(—), an obligatory short syllable by a breve . The superposition of a macron over two breves indicates the poet’s
choice of one long or two short syllables
C. W. Forstall et al.
290 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
(including those in a following word). Elided syl-
lables, pronounced weakly or not at all, are not
counted as having any metrical quantity. Poems
written in elegiac couplets may be as short as a
single couplet or may comprise hundreds.
Although the number of possible combinations
of long and short syllables in a couplet is limited,
poets nevertheless do tend to show large-scale
habits, the study of which has been a productive
branch of scholarship in Latin poetry since antiquity
itself (for example Platnauer, 1951). However, pre-
vious work in this line has concentrated on describ-
ing the corpus-scale differences between authors
(thousands of lines), whereas here we hope to lever-
age meter in order to make some sense of simila-
rities, and to consider patterns at a more local level.
In this first attempt, the metrical feature was a
simple one: having scanned a poem, we calculated
functional n-gram frequencies for sequences
of quantities just as described for characters in
Section 4.2.
5 The Statistical Evidence of
Catullan Influence in
Angustae Vitae
5.1 The functional n-gram analysis
Using the functional n-gram feature, we processed
Catullus’ Poems 1–64, as this is where most of the
suspected intertextual connections were identified.
First, we examined the most frequently occurring
character-level bi-grams in the Catullan poems
(Table 1). The character-level bi-gram was chosen
because it represents a sound primitive that also
captures some word information, making it a
highly descriptive feature. An examination of the
ten most frequently occurring bi-grams revealed
that while ‘er’ was the top bi-gram, ‘re’ produced
the highest probability (excluding the bi-gram ‘qu,’
which always produces 1), indicating a tighter cou-
pling between characters. Further, ‘re’ appears as an
important sound element in several of the words
from phrases common to both Catullus and
Angustae Vitae (ludere and redde).
Considering just this ‘re’ bi-gram, we generated
probabilities for all of Catullus 1–64, split into
individual 20 line samples (with overlap between
poems). This sample size was chosen in order to
give us an ample amount of training data for our
machine learning while still preserving some of the
boundaries between poems. With much suspected
similarity between Catullus 2 and Angustae Vitae,
we chose the probability feature generated from
Catullus 1 and 2 (each poem is 10 lines long) as
our representative sample, and selected all other
samples most resembling it (within 0.06 from
the representative sample; this range was defined
empirically based on the samples available for
Catullus) to form our training data. The complete
training data for our classifier is shown in Table 2.
Using the libsvm package (Chang and Lin, 2001)
a one-class SVM was trained using a radial basis
function kernel with ¼ 1 and ¼ 0.1.
Results for the functional n-gram analysis
confirm that there is a striking similarity between
Angustae Vitae and the poetry of Catullus for one of
the most common sound patterns found in each.
Based on raw probability features alone, the 20
line sample composed of Catullus 1 and 2 yields:
0.458, while the 20 lines of Angustae Vitae yield:
0.486. Hence by using the ‘Catullan influence’
SVM, we achieved a positive classification for
Angustae Vitae. The results for the other poets also
satisfied our hypotheses. Each corpus from the re-
maining poets was also split into 20 line samples,
with 40 random samples chosen for each (because of
its smaller size, Book 4 of the Aeneid only produced
Table 1 The ten most frequently occurring
character-level bi-grams in Catullus’ Poems
1–64. The bi-gram ‘re’ is highlighted in bold
Rank bi-gram Probability
1 er 0.180
2 qu 1.000
3 is 0.169
4 en 0.162
5 re 0.275
6 te 0.251
7 es 0.146
8 um 0.164
9 in 0.140
10 it 0.133
Investigating Paul the Deacon’s Angustae Vitae
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 291
35 samples in total) and processed accordingly.
Samples from Tibullus and Propertius showed the
most similarity to Catullus, while all other poets
showed little similarity. A summary of all classifica-
tion results is given in Table 3.
5.2 The low-probability analysis
Using the low-probability analysis, we processed
all of our texts once again, looking for the key
word-level n-grams that represent the intertexts
introduced in Section 2. Here, we express these
n-grams using the following generalized templates:
delic_ lu(de|si)_ (representing the notion of ‘de-
lights and play’), fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ (representing
the notion of ‘burning with love’), and redde_
miser_ poema_ (representing to the notion of
‘misery induced by the absence of poetic exchange’).
Results for our search for these templates over our
20 line samples of text are shown in Table 4. New
possible intertexts were found in both Propertius
and Tibullus. We also note that we were able to
find additional possible intertexts in Propertius
2.15, 4.4, and 4.7, even though these were not
aligned with our sequentially generated 20 line sam-
ples. Our samples from Horace and Ovid did not
contain any of the target sequence templates.
With the word-level n-grams from Table 4 that
are common to most poets, we created two SVMs
for delic_ lu(de|si)_ and fla(gr|mm)_ amor_. These
SVMs use the training data of Table 2, augmented
with the probability feature 0.043 from the sample
containing Catullus 1 and 2 for delic_ lu(de|si)_,
and the feature 0.024 from a sample containing
the relevant portion of Catullus 67 for fla(gr|mm)_
amor_. The testing data from the functional n-gram
experiments was once again used for this new set of
experiments, with the addition of low-probability
features computed over each sample. After applying
Table 4 Computed low-probability features from the
word-level n-grams made up of our three intertextual
sequence templates
Word-level n-gram Probability Source
delic_ lu(de|si)_ 0.043 Catullus 2
delic_ lu(de|si)_ 0.005 Catullus 50
delic_ lu(de|si)_ 0.013 Catullus 50
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.024 Catullus 67
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.028 Catullus 68
redde_ miser_ poema_ 0.015 Catullus 50
delic_ lu(de|si)_ 0.014 Angustae Vitae
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.020 Angustae Vitae
redde_ miser_ poema_ 0.018 Angustae Vitae
delic_ lu(de|si)_ 0.019 Propertius 2.34b
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.027 Propertius 3.8
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.014 Propertius 3.19
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.023 Propertius 2.34b
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.125 Tibullus 1.9
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.143 Tibullus 2.4
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.080 Tibullus 3.12
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ 0.033 Aeneid 4
Entries in bold represent new possible intertexts discovered by
our automated analysis.
Table 2 Features used to train the ‘Catullan influence’
one-class SVM. Each numerical feature represents the
character-level bi-gram ‘re’ for a poem or pair of poems
(depending on poem length, for sample consistency)
Feature Poems
0.458 1 and 2
0.412 2b and 3
0.455 4 and 5
0.524 7 and 8
0.500 13
0.406 17 and 21
0.435 38 and 39
0.480 44 and 45
0.480 50 and 51
0.444 62
0.463 64
0.464 64
Table 3 Results for the functional n-gram analysis ex-
pressed as samples classified positively with Catullus out
of all samples. Angustae Vitae is highlighted in bold
Text Positive Class.
More like Catullus
Angustae Vitae 1/1
Propertius Elegies 6/40
Tibullus Elegies 5/40
Less like Catullus
Ovid Amores 2/40
Horace Epistles 3/40
Virgil Aeneid 2/35
C. W. Forstall et al.
292 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
our SVMs, we noted a reduction in positive classi-
fications compared to the results in Table 3 for some
poets. For the delic_ lu(de|si)_ SVM, Ovid, Horace,
and Virgil each contributed one positive classifica-
tion, while Propertius contributed five. For the
fla(gr|mm)_ amor_ SVM, Virgil again contributed
one positive classification. Table 5 summarizes these
results. Based on these results, it appears likely that
this feature does not ordinarily contribute to further
positive classifications, but does help refine the
results.
5.3 The metrical analysis
Metrical features were used only in comparing
poems written in elegiac couplets, and so a slightly
different selection of poems was used. Paul’s entire
elegiac corpus was compared to similar-sized elegiac
corpora by Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid
(Table 6). Samples were twenty lines each.
Frequencies were calculated for bi-grams and tri-
grams composed of long and short syllable values.
Because the features considered were composed
of only two quantities, in cases a pairs of frequencies
necessarily added up to 100%, for example, long-
long-short and long-long-long. One member of
such pairs was discarded. Furthermore, several
patterns were not possible given the constraints of
elegiac couplets, for example, long-short-long and
short-short-short. All remaining features were
considered individually to identify those which
produced the best separation between authors.
Principal components analysis was performed on
the complete feature set.
Results from the metrical feature produced no
useful refinement of the values from either of the
other two features, and were largely incompatible
due to the restricted data set. Nevertheless, con-
sidered separately, the results from this feature
show some promise. Overall, the metrical n-gram
features produced poor separation of the five
poets considered (Figs 4 and 5). Inasmuch as au-
thors could be distinguished, Paul was most differ-
ent from Catullus, and most similar to Ovid. Paul
varied internally more than the others.
Several of the variables seemed to vary roughly
chronologically across the material sampled. Over
the generation between Catullus (c. 84–c. 54 BCE)
and Ovid (43 BCE–17 CE) we tend to see, for ex-
ample, a trend downwards in the frequency of
long-long-long. Indeed, the more refined critics of
the Roman empire considered their republican for-
bears’ extended sequences of long syllables ponder-
ous. Paul (d. 799 CE) is later than rest by far longer
than the period which they span, yet a proportional
difference was not seen with respect to the metrical
features examined here. The trend from Catullus
to Ovid represents a continuous, living tradition
of poetry performed in a spoken language, but by
Paul’s time the meter of poetry in contemporary,
spoken Latin followed entirely different rules. Paul
had to learn the tradition of classical elegiac poetry
entirely from books. His access to works from dif-
ferent periods without the bias of one contemporary
literary clique may contribute to the greater variance
seen in his works.
Table 5 Results for the low-probability analysis expressed
as samples classified positively with Catullus out of all
samples. Angustae Vitae is highlighted in bold
Text Positive Class.
More Like Catullus
Angustae Vitae 1/1
Propertius Elegies 5/40
Tibullus Elegies 5/40
Less Like Catullus
Ovid Amores 1/40
Horace Epistles 1/40
Virgil Aeneid 1/35
The results here show improvement over those in Table 3.
Table 6 Texts used for metrical analysis
Author Works Total
lines
Paul the Deacon
(as numbered in
Du¨mmler, 1881)
Poems 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 12
(lines 37–42), 14, 16, 19,
21–24, 26 (ll. 4–13),
27–33, 36, 37, 39, 40, 42,
43, 48, 50, 56 (ll. 38–41)
755
Catullus Poems 65–116 637
Tibullus Elegies Book 1 804
Propertius Elegies Book 1 703
Ovid Amores Book 1 767
Investigating Paul the Deacon’s Angustae Vitae
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 293
6 Conclusions and Further Work
These results show how new computational meth-
ods can have value for the study of intertextuality:
specifically, that many aspects of subjective philo-
logical analysis can be quantified for better compari-
son between studies, and that machine learning has
the potential to draw out new aspects of stylistic
influence and reference.
In our phonetic oriented analysis, the functional
n-gram feature provided a tool for quantifying a
notable stylistic similarity between Catullus’ Poems
1 and 2 and Angustae Vitae. Our technique for com-
puting word-level n-grams over disconnected
Metrical n−gram Frequencies for Elegiac Couplets
0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
0.
40
0.
45
0.
50
0.
55
sh
or
t−
lo
ng
−l
on
g
Catullus’ elegies
Paul’s elegies
0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
0.
40
0.
45
0.
50
0.
55
Tibullus Bk 1
Paul’s elegies
0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
0.
40
0.
45
0.
50
0.
55
long−long−long
sh
or
t−
lo
ng
−l
on
g
Ovid Amores 1
Paul’s elegies
0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 0.60 0.65 0.70
0.
40
0.
45
0.
50
0.
55
long−long−long
Propertius Bk 1
Paul’s elegies
Fig. 4 Frequencies of two metrical tri-grams based on syllable weights in elegiac couplets. Paul the Deacon is compared
with each of Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid. The y-axis gives the frequency with which the sequence
short-long is followed by a long; the x-axis, the frequency with which long-long is followed by long. The scale and
the data for Paul are the same in each
C. W. Forstall et al.
294 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
sequences of low-probability words was able to
refine our classification results. Our metrical ana-
lysis was not able to improve results further, and
did not show a strong level of similarity between
Catullus and Angustae Vitae. It did, however, iden-
tify a widely accepted trend in Latin poetics. We
suspect that the inclusion of word boundaries as
well as syllable quantities would greatly increase
the power of this feature set. We also introduced
the notion of open set recognition for influence
recognition, which we believe has great potential
value for this field.
This work is part of an ongoing effort to
understand the relationship between the frequency
of linguistic elements and the creation of litera-
ture. The metrics introduced here will be inte-
grated into the University at Buffalo’s Tesserae
(Coffee, 2010), a new project which provides
web-based users with intertextual search tools for
Latin poetry.
Metrical n−grams: Principal Components
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
−
0.
15
−
0.
10
−
0.
05
0.
00
0.
05
0.
10
0.
15
PC
2
Catullus’ elegies
Paul’s elegies
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
−
0.
15
−
0.
10
−
0.
05
0.
00
0.
05
0.
10
0.
15 Tibullus Bk 1
Paul’s elegies
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
−
0.
15
−
0.
10
−
0.
05
0.
00
0.
05
0.
10
0.
15
PC1
PC
2
Ovid Amores 1
Paul’s elegies
−0.3 −0.2 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
−
0.
15
−
0.
10
−
0.
05
0.
00
0.
05
0.
10
0.
15
PC1
Propertius Bk 1
Paul’s elegies
Fig. 5 First two principal components calculated from the complete set of metrical n-gram frequencies, as in Fig. 4
Investigating Paul the Deacon’s Angustae Vitae
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 295
Acknowledgements
We thank Joseph Pucci of Brown University and
Marilyn Skinner of the University of Arizona for
advice on Paul and Catullus. We thank Neil
Coffee of the University at Buffalo for the use of
Tesserae. Continued development of the methods
described here is to be funded in part by the
Digital Humanities Initiative at Buffalo under the
aegis of its Textual Analysis Working Group.