Deeper Delta across genres and
languages: do we really need
the most frequent words?
............................................................................................................................................................
Jan Rybicki and Maciej Eder
Pedagogical University, Krako´w, Poland
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
This article examines the success of authorship attribution of Burrows’s Delta in
several corpora representing a variety of languages and genres. Contrary to the
approaches of our predecessors, who only investigated the attributive effective-
ness of the very top of the list of the most frequent words, hundreds of possible
combinations of word vectors were tested in this study, not solely starting with
the most frequent word in each corpus. The results show that Delta works best
for prose in English and German and less well for agglutinative languages such as
Polish or Latin.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
In 2007, John Burrows identified three regions in
word frequency lists of corpora in authorship attri-
bution and stylometry. The first of these regions
consists of the most frequent words, for which his
Delta has become the best-known method of study
(Burrows, 2002b). This is evidenced by a varied
body of research with interesting modifications of
the method (e.g. Hoover, 2004a, b; Argamon, 2008).
At the other end of the frequency list, Iota deals with
the lowest frequency words, while ‘the large area
between the extremes of ubiquity and rarity’
(Burrows, 2007) is now the target of many studies
employing Zeta or its modifications, such as Craig’s
Zeta (e.g. Hoover, 2007; Craig and Kinney, 2009).
Due to the popularity of the three methods, it was
only a matter of time before Delta (and, to a lesser
extent, Zeta and Iota) were applied to texts in lan-
guages other than Modern English: Middle Dutch
(Dalen-Oskam and Zundert, 2007), Old English
(Garcı´a and Martı´n, 2007), and Polish (Eder and
Rybicki, 2009). Delta has also been used in
translation-oriented articles, including Burrows’s
own work on Juvenal (Burrows, 2002a) and
Rybicki’s attempts at translator attribution (2009,
2011).
It has been generally—and mainly empirically—
assumed that the use of methods relying on the
most frequent words in a corpus should work just
as well in other languages as it does in English; this
question has not been approached in any detail until
very recently (Juola, 2009). We cannot fail to ob-
serve that its success rates in Polish, although still
high, fall somewhat short of its detection rate in
English (Rybicki, 2009; Eder and Rybicki, 2011).
Also, to further complicate the issue of multilingual-
ism, the study by Rybicki mentioned above (2009)
seems to suggest that, in a corpus of translated lit-
erary texts, Delta is much better at recognizing the
author of the original than the translator. Or, to be
more precise: with only two candidate translators of
the same author, Delta fares well; however, at higher
numbers of translators and of authors of the ori-
ginal, Delta’s guessing favors the latter rather than
the former. Additionally, genre differences between
texts have often been blamed for worse (or better)
results in authorship attribution by Delta. This was
yet another good reason for a more in-depth look
into the workings of Burrows’s method not only in
Correspondence:
Jan Rybicki
Institute of Modern
Languages,
Pedagogical University,
31-128 Krako´w, Poland
Ul. Karmelicka 41.
Email:
jkrybicki@gmail.com
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
315
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr031 Advance Access published on 14 July 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
its ‘original’ English and in a variety of other lan-
guages, but also in a variety of genres.
2 Methods
The software we used provides several flavours of
Delta (as well as other distance measures); however,
the one consistently used in the final results of this
study was Burrows’s classic Delta, for the reason
that it was the classic method and, perhaps more
importantly, because tentative results obtained
with the other Delta varieties were very similar.
In this study, a single major modification was
applied to the usual Delta process. According to
the standard Delta procedure, each corpus was
divided into ‘training’ samples in a primary set
(one representative sample per each author) and
the remaining ‘test’ samples in a secondary set.
The goal of such a procedure was to test how
many samples of known authorship were ‘guessed’,
or correctly classified to the proper ‘training’
sample.
Each analysis was first made with the top fifty
most frequent words in the corpus; then the fifty
most frequent words would be omitted and the
next fifty words (i.e. words ranked 51–100 in the
descending word frequency list) would be taken
for analysis; then the next 50 most frequent words
(those ranked 101–150), and so on until the
required limit (usually the 5,000th most frequent
word) would be reached. Then the procedure
would restart with the first 100 words (1–100), the
second 100 words (101–100), and so on. At every
subsequent restart, the number of the words
omitted from the top of the frequency list would
be increased by fifty until the length of this
‘moving window’ descending down the word fre-
quency list reached another limit (usually 5,000).
This was done with a single 1,000-line script, written
by Eder, for the statistical programming environ-
ment R.1 The script produced word frequency
tables, calculated the myriad Delta iterations and
produced ‘heatmap’ graphs of Delta’s success rate
for each of the frequency list intervals, showing the
best combinations of initial word position in word-
list and size of window, including variations of
pronoun deletion and culling parameters. In fact,
the heatmaps are probably the only feasible way of
presenting such an amount of results in a compre-
hensive way.2 In the resulting graphs below, the
horizontal axis presents the size of each wordlist
used for one set of Delta calculations (the ‘moving
window’); the vertical axis shows how many of the
most frequent words were omitted (or where the
‘moving window’ began for each iteration). Each
of the runs of the script produced an average of
approximately 3,000 Delta iterations.
3 Material
The texts that constitute the corpora used in this
study were taken from a variety of good-quality
Internet sources (mostly, various national electronic
libraries), cleaned of paraphernalia (such as extra
titles or Project Gutenberg’s legal disclaimers),
and saved as Unicode text files; at this point,
human editing ceased and the script took over to
split the strings into words and perform the entire
analysis.
The project included the following corpora (used
separately).
Code Language Texts Attribution
E1 English Sixty-five novels from Swift
to Conrad
Author
E2 English Thrity-two epic poems from
Milton to Tennyson
Author
P1 Polish Sixty-nine 19th- and early
20th-century novels from
Kraszewski to Z_ eromski
Author
F1 French Seventy-one 19th- and
20th-century novels from
Voltaire to Gide
Author
L1 Latin Ninety-four prose texts from
Cicero to Gellius
Author
L2 Latin Twenty-eight hexameter
poems from Lucretius to
Jacopo Sannazaro
Author
G1 German Sixty-six literary texts from
Goethe to Thomas Mann
Author
H1 Hungarian Sixty-four novels from
Keme´ny to Bro´dy
Author
I1 Italian Seventy-seven novels from
Manzoni to D’Annunzio
Author
S1 English Forty-two works by
Shakespeare
Genre
J. Rybicki and M. Eder
316 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
4 Results
The English novel corpus (E1, Fig. 1) was the one
with the best attributions for all available sample
sizes starting at the top of the reference corpus
word frequency list; it was equally easy to attribute
even if the first 2,000 most frequent words were
omitted in the analysis—or even the first 3,000 for
longer samples. This was also the only corpus where
a perfect attributive score (100%) was achieved
almost constantly, which is reflected, in the graph,
by the widespread and smooth dark color in the
heatmap. The English epic poems (E2, Fig. 2), on
the other hand, while displaying a 100% accuracy in
some ‘pockets,’ attributed in general significantly
worse than the English novels. For less frequent
words, i.e. below the 2,000th on the frequency
list, the guessing effectiveness began decreasing
very quickly; the area of best attributive success
was removed from the top of the word frequency
list, into the 1,000–2,000 most frequent word
region.
The Polish corpus of Sixty-nine 19th- and early
20th-century classic Polish novels (P1, Fig. 3)
showed marked improvement in Delta attribution
rate when the wordlist started at some 450 words
down the frequency list; the most successful sample
sizes were relatively small: no more than 1,200
words long.
The French corpus proved difficult to interpret
because there was no clear smooth area of good
Fig. 1 Attribution accuracy for 65 English novels (per-
centage of correct attributions). Color coding is indicated
by the sidebar scale
Fig. 2 Attribution accuracy for 32 English epic poems
Fig. 3 Attribution accuracy for 69 Polish novel classics
Deeper Delta across genres and languages
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 317
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
accuracy (F1, Fig. 4): Delta was very successful
mainly for small-sized pockets from the top of the
overall frequency wordlist. In contrast, the graph for
the German corpus (G1, Fig. 5) presented a success
rate akin to that for the English novels, with a con-
sistently high correct attribution in most of the
studied spectrum of sample size and for samples
beginning anywhere between the 1st and the
1,000th word in the corpus frequency list. The
best attribution was achieved in a narrow region
around 1,000 MFWs from the top of the list.
Of the two Latin corpora, the prose texts
(L1, Fig. 6) could serve as excellent evidence for a
minimalist approach in authorship attribution
based on most frequent words, as the best (if not
perfect) results were obtained by staying close to the
axis intersection point: no more than 750 words,
taken no further than the 50th place on the fre-
quency rank list. The top score, 75%, was in fact
achieved only once—at 250 MFWs from the top of
the list.
The other Latin corpus, that of hexameter poetry
(L2, Fig. 7), paints a much more heterogeneous pic-
ture: Delta was only successful for top words from
the frequency list at rare small (150), medium (700),
and large (1,700) window sizes and for a few iso-
lated places around the 500/500 intersection point
in the graph. Again, the best score of 75% is repre-
sented by two pockets at 110 and 120 MFWs count-
ing from the top of the list.
The corpus of 19th-century Hungarian novels
(H1, Fig. 8) exhibited good success for much of
Fig. 4 Attribution accuracy for 71 French novels
Fig. 5 Attribution accuracy for 66 German prose texts
Fig. 6 Attribution accuracy for 94 Latin prose texts
J. Rybicki and M. Eder
318 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the studied spectrum and an interesting hotspot of
short samples at approximately 4,000 words from
the top of the word frequency list. What was even
more interesting, the hotspot was surrounded by an
area of a very weak attributive success.
With the Italian novels (I1, Fig. 9), Delta was at
its best for a broad variety of sample sizes, but only
when some 1000 most frequent words were elimi-
nated from the reference corpus. The top Italian
score, 76%, appeared only a few times for wordlists
of 400, 450, and 500 words starting at the 350th and
the 400th most frequent word.
The final corpus used in this series of analyses
was that of 42 works by Shakespeare (S1, Fig. 10).
It was also the single case where Delta was tested for
genre recognition—the works were categorized as
poems, tragedies, comedies, romances, or histories.
And while the overall reliability was poor, there is a
smallish yet visible darker region in Fig. 10 for
pockets of some 2,500 most frequent words starting
at the top, or near the top, of the word frequency
list.
5 Conclusions
The graphs presented above seem to confirm the
suspicions that, while Delta is still the most success-
ful method of authorship attribution based on word
frequencies, its success is not independent of the
language of the texts studied. This has not been
noticed so far for the simple reason that Delta
Fig. 7 Attribution accuracy for 28 Latin hexameter
poems
Fig. 8 Attribution accuracy for 64 Hungarian novels
Fig. 9 Attribution accuracy for 77 Italian novels
Deeper Delta across genres and languages
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 319
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
studies have been done, in a great majority, on
English-language prose. Yet even the switch from
prose to poetry within the language of Dickens
and Milton has consequences for the best-
attribution region—perhaps for the simple reason
that poetic texts (even those brought together in
E2, a corpus of epic poetry, i.e. works of some
length) provide less adequate statistics than material
gathered from full novels.
Thus Delta’s high success for prose texts, in gen-
eral, is a positive and optimistic result of this series
of experiments; less cause for optimism—and less
uniformity—can be seen in Delta’s behaviour in
prose texts in other languages. Its high and consist-
ent attributions throughout the frequency regions
studied for the sixty-six German novels allows a hy-
pothesis that Germanic languages might provide the
best material for authorial attribution, and that their
shared characteristics can be thanked for this. The
relatively poorer results for Latin and Polish—both
highly inflected in comparison with English and
German—suggests the degree of inflection as a pos-
sible factor. This would make sense in that the top
strata of word frequency lists for languages with low
inflection contain more uniform words, especially
function words; as a result, the most frequent
words in languages such as English are relatively
more frequent than the most frequent words in ag-
glutinative languages such as Latin.
While diagrams for most other languages in this
series of experiments seem, at the very least, not to
disprove this working hypothesis, a severe blow to
its simple elegance has been dealt by the Hungarian
corpus, i.e. a collection of texts in a language gen-
erally deemed the most inflected one of those under
study here. To make matters worse, Delta’s success
in this unlikely collection of texts was even more
remarkable due to their relative similarity as repre-
sentatives of the same trend in 19th-century
Hungarian fiction. What seemed a difficult corpus
in a difficult (i.e. highly agglutinative) language
scored visibly better than the ‘easier’ corpora of
Polish or Latin prose. At this point, it is worth men-
tioning that any statements on the relative ease and
difficulty of corpora collected from various lan-
guages and literatures can be tentative at best and
require further study.
The greatest methodological problem that this
study shows as far as Delta is concerned is that,
while ‘pockets’ of good attribution reliability can
be found at a variety of parameters of culling, word-
list length and/or number of the most frequent
words omitted (or not) from the top of the fre-
quency list, ‘pockets’ of similar size can be found
nearby where attribution is anything but good. This
study shows that obtaining near-perfect results for,
say, the top 1,000 most frequent words does nothing
to guarantee similar success for the top 2,000 words
(with the possible exception of English or German
corpora, where Delta’s success has been shown to be
more uniform than in the other languages studied).
And that, while it might be a good idea to manipu-
late the above-mentioned parameters, it is not yet
known how to manipulate them for a given corpus,
language, genre, or attribution type. It seems so far
that there is no ‘best,’ or ‘most reliable,’ or ‘univer-
sal,’ value for either the moving window or its initial
position in the most frequent word lists. This is
frustrating. And this calls for finding a way to
even out the pockets of better and worse parameter
combinations—to average them out and thus to
eschew cherry-picking—possibly, with bootstrap-
ping, as suggested by initial results of our recent
Fig. 10 Accuracy in genre recognition for 42 works by
Shakespeare
J. Rybicki and M. Eder
320 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
studies (Eder, 2011; Eder and Rybicki, 2011;
Rybicki, 2011). But even more frustrating is the
fact that we do not know why Delta in Hungarian
performs oddly compared to English because,
simply, no one knows why.