The benefits and limits of
computerization in conflict
simulation
............................................................................................................................................................
Philip Sabin
King’s College London, London, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Computing is not the only way to model and simulate humanities problems. In
the specific field of conflict simulation, there is a long and continuing tradition of
using manual modelling techniques such as maps and counters to create playable
games which mirror some of the dynamics of real armed conflicts. Computer
games are not automatically superior to such manual models, since mass
market commercial software focuses far more on entertainment than on realistic
simulation, and since the enormous capabilities of computers tend to encourage
detailed incorporation of quantifiable technicalities at the expense of the vital but
much less tractable human element. The biggest limitation of computer models
is their limited transparency and design accessibility for non-programmers such
as humanities students and scholars. Manual modelling offers a valuable ‘bridge’
between computing and traditional humanities scholarship, allowing easier gen-
eration and use of specifically tailored models, and building synergistic relation-
ships which foster more widespread and effective adoption of digital techniques.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
A key concern of digital humanities scholars is to
define and articulate what methodological advan-
tages computing may bring to the understanding
of problems in the humanities as opposed to
the natural sciences. My KCL colleague Willard
McCarty has written eloquently on this issue, and
he has made the very important point that techni-
ques such as ‘modelling’ and ‘simulation’ are
not limited to the specific field of computing, but
have a much broader history and application within
intellectual endeavour as a whole (McCarty, 2002,
2004). My colleagues Matthew Kirschenbaum,
Patrick Juola, and I built on this important truth
that modelling and computing are not necessarily
synonymous when we presented a panel at DH
2010 on ‘Wargames in a Digital Age’, drawing
on our specific expertise in the field of conflict
simulation. In this short article, I endeavour to
show with reference to this particular case study
that computing has limits as well as benefits as a
modelling medium, and that a better understanding
of these advantages and disadvantages may help
digital humanities scholars to develop even more
effective methodological synergies in the future.
Ever since the development of Kriegsspiel nearly
two centuries ago, military professionals and enthu-
siasts have used simulation and gaming techniques
to model real military conflicts (Allen, 1987; Perla,
1990; Dunnigan, 1992). This phenomenon builds
on the theoretical similarity between war and
games, in that both are dialectical strategic contests
between opposing wills, each struggling to prevail
(Huizinga, 1970, ch. 5; Cornell and Allen, 2002).
Hence, Clausewitz said that ‘In the whole range
of human activities, war most closely resembles
a game of cards’ (von Clausewitz, 1976, p. 86).
There are now many thousands of published war-
games, covering almost every historical conflict.1
Correspondence:
Philip Sabin,
Department of War Studies,
King’s College London,
Strand, London WC2R 2LS,
UK.
E-mail:
philip.sabin@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
323
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr024 Advance Access published on 16 May 2011
The growing potential of computers has naturally
transformed the field of conflict simulation. Military
training now employs networked computer arrays
running real-time first person models of entire con-
flict environments, and tens of millions of enthu-
siasts use similar first person simulations of air
combat, ground fighting and the like (Halter,
2006; Smith, 2009). The similarity between the
genres has become so great that virtually the same
games are often employed by military professionals
and civilian enthusiasts, as with the commercial
game Armed Assault (Bohemia Interactive, 2007),
whose military variant VBS2 is widely used as a
training aid and has even been released back
to the public by the UK Ministry of Defence as a
recruitment device!2 However, what is interesting
is the persistence of traditional manual simulation
techniques alongside this computerized main-
stream. Just as military forces continue to use real
field exercises, so many enthusiasts continue to
employ pre-computer age techniques such as physi-
cal maps and counters in their modelling of conflict.
Indeed, such ‘manual’ wargames are now being
published at a faster rate than ever before (albeit
in smaller print runs), and there are still far more
manual than computer wargames in existence
(Palmer, 1977).3
I have been playing and designing conflict simu-
lations for over three decades, and I use both
manual and computerized versions routinely as
instructional aids and research tools in the War
Studies Department at KCL, including through
an MA course in which students design their own
manual simulations of conflicts of their choice
(Sabin, 2007; Mills and Sabin, 2008).4 This gives
me a powerful insight into the benefits and limits
of computerization in conflict simulation, especially
from a scholarly perspective. My forthcoming book
Simulating War focuses heavily on manual simula-
tion techniques despite the ongoing computer
revolution (Sabin, 2011), and an examination of
the reasons for this yields some important lessons
for digital humanities scholars seeking to build
closer links with non-scientists for mutual academic
benefit.
It is easy to see why video games like Activision’s
Call of Duty series sell tens of millions of copies,
while manual wargames now sell only a few thou-
sand (Ahmed, 2010).5 Manual wargames have
always been complex, lengthy, and cerebral affairs,
whereas video gamers hardly even need to read any
rules before jumping into the vivid 3D world to
control their own personal ‘avatar’, just as if they
are stepping into a war movie. The downside of this
mass market appeal is that computer and console
wargames are big budget commercial products
in which simulation usually comes a very poor
second to entertainment value (exactly as in the
film industry). The great majority of ‘first person
shooters’ and ‘real time strategy’ games sacrifice
realism to enjoyment in a way which makes them
useless as serious models of warfare. Only a small
minority of commercial computer wargames are
true simulations, and since such games will only
run on the latest hardware and soon become
unplayable as operating systems evolve, the
number of useable and worthwhile computer war-
games is dwarfed by the ever-growing corpus of
manual games which has accumulated over the
past five decades.
The relative advantages of manual and computer
simulation vary greatly depending on the type of
conflict being modelled and the perspective which
users are intended to adopt. Broadly speaking,
the more fast-moving and physically calculable the
conflict environment, and the more that users are
intended to experience the perspective of a single
real individual, the more that computers have to
offer. Hence, although it is possible to simulate
aerial dogfights using maps, counters, and dozens
of pages of highly complex and time-consuming
rules (Webster, 1995), the fast-paced 3D man-
oeuvres are obviously much better captured by
real-time computer simulations from the perspec-
tive of the individual cockpits, and this is exactly
what I use in my own teaching about air combat.
Even when simulations are intended to model
entire battles, computers can employ AI routines
to mimic the limited perspectives of an individual
commander, by masking the full picture and impos-
ing realistic command delays in a way which manual
simulations find harder because their users must
run the whole system rather than just playing indi-
vidual roles within it.6
P. Sabin
