The benefits and limits of
computerization in conflict
simulation
............................................................................................................................................................
Philip Sabin
King’s College London, London, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Computing is not the only way to model and simulate humanities problems. In
the specific field of conflict simulation, there is a long and continuing tradition of
using manual modelling techniques such as maps and counters to create playable
games which mirror some of the dynamics of real armed conflicts. Computer
games are not automatically superior to such manual models, since mass
market commercial software focuses far more on entertainment than on realistic
simulation, and since the enormous capabilities of computers tend to encourage
detailed incorporation of quantifiable technicalities at the expense of the vital but
much less tractable human element. The biggest limitation of computer models
is their limited transparency and design accessibility for non-programmers such
as humanities students and scholars. Manual modelling offers a valuable ‘bridge’
between computing and traditional humanities scholarship, allowing easier gen-
eration and use of specifically tailored models, and building synergistic relation-
ships which foster more widespread and effective adoption of digital techniques.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
A key concern of digital humanities scholars is to
define and articulate what methodological advan-
tages computing may bring to the understanding
of problems in the humanities as opposed to
the natural sciences. My KCL colleague Willard
McCarty has written eloquently on this issue, and
he has made the very important point that techni-
ques such as ‘modelling’ and ‘simulation’ are
not limited to the specific field of computing, but
have a much broader history and application within
intellectual endeavour as a whole (McCarty, 2002,
2004). My colleagues Matthew Kirschenbaum,
Patrick Juola, and I built on this important truth
that modelling and computing are not necessarily
synonymous when we presented a panel at DH
2010 on ‘Wargames in a Digital Age’, drawing
on our specific expertise in the field of conflict
simulation. In this short article, I endeavour to
show with reference to this particular case study
that computing has limits as well as benefits as a
modelling medium, and that a better understanding
of these advantages and disadvantages may help
digital humanities scholars to develop even more
effective methodological synergies in the future.
Ever since the development of Kriegsspiel nearly
two centuries ago, military professionals and enthu-
siasts have used simulation and gaming techniques
to model real military conflicts (Allen, 1987; Perla,
1990; Dunnigan, 1992). This phenomenon builds
on the theoretical similarity between war and
games, in that both are dialectical strategic contests
between opposing wills, each struggling to prevail
(Huizinga, 1970, ch. 5; Cornell and Allen, 2002).
Hence, Clausewitz said that ‘In the whole range
of human activities, war most closely resembles
a game of cards’ (von Clausewitz, 1976, p. 86).
There are now many thousands of published war-
games, covering almost every historical conflict.1
Correspondence:
Philip Sabin,
Department of War Studies,
King’s College London,
Strand, London WC2R 2LS,
UK.
E-mail:
philip.sabin@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
323
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr024 Advance Access published on 16 May 2011
The growing potential of computers has naturally
transformed the field of conflict simulation. Military
training now employs networked computer arrays
running real-time first person models of entire con-
flict environments, and tens of millions of enthu-
siasts use similar first person simulations of air
combat, ground fighting and the like (Halter,
2006; Smith, 2009). The similarity between the
genres has become so great that virtually the same
games are often employed by military professionals
and civilian enthusiasts, as with the commercial
game Armed Assault (Bohemia Interactive, 2007),
whose military variant VBS2 is widely used as a
training aid and has even been released back
to the public by the UK Ministry of Defence as a
recruitment device!2 However, what is interesting
is the persistence of traditional manual simulation
techniques alongside this computerized main-
stream. Just as military forces continue to use real
field exercises, so many enthusiasts continue to
employ pre-computer age techniques such as physi-
cal maps and counters in their modelling of conflict.
Indeed, such ‘manual’ wargames are now being
published at a faster rate than ever before (albeit
in smaller print runs), and there are still far more
manual than computer wargames in existence
(Palmer, 1977).3
I have been playing and designing conflict simu-
lations for over three decades, and I use both
manual and computerized versions routinely as
instructional aids and research tools in the War
Studies Department at KCL, including through
an MA course in which students design their own
manual simulations of conflicts of their choice
(Sabin, 2007; Mills and Sabin, 2008).4 This gives
me a powerful insight into the benefits and limits
of computerization in conflict simulation, especially
from a scholarly perspective. My forthcoming book
Simulating War focuses heavily on manual simula-
tion techniques despite the ongoing computer
revolution (Sabin, 2011), and an examination of
the reasons for this yields some important lessons
for digital humanities scholars seeking to build
closer links with non-scientists for mutual academic
benefit.
It is easy to see why video games like Activision’s
Call of Duty series sell tens of millions of copies,
while manual wargames now sell only a few thou-
sand (Ahmed, 2010).5 Manual wargames have
always been complex, lengthy, and cerebral affairs,
whereas video gamers hardly even need to read any
rules before jumping into the vivid 3D world to
control their own personal ‘avatar’, just as if they
are stepping into a war movie. The downside of this
mass market appeal is that computer and console
wargames are big budget commercial products
in which simulation usually comes a very poor
second to entertainment value (exactly as in the
film industry). The great majority of ‘first person
shooters’ and ‘real time strategy’ games sacrifice
realism to enjoyment in a way which makes them
useless as serious models of warfare. Only a small
minority of commercial computer wargames are
true simulations, and since such games will only
run on the latest hardware and soon become
unplayable as operating systems evolve, the
number of useable and worthwhile computer war-
games is dwarfed by the ever-growing corpus of
manual games which has accumulated over the
past five decades.
The relative advantages of manual and computer
simulation vary greatly depending on the type of
conflict being modelled and the perspective which
users are intended to adopt. Broadly speaking,
the more fast-moving and physically calculable the
conflict environment, and the more that users are
intended to experience the perspective of a single
real individual, the more that computers have to
offer. Hence, although it is possible to simulate
aerial dogfights using maps, counters, and dozens
of pages of highly complex and time-consuming
rules (Webster, 1995), the fast-paced 3D man-
oeuvres are obviously much better captured by
real-time computer simulations from the perspec-
tive of the individual cockpits, and this is exactly
what I use in my own teaching about air combat.
Even when simulations are intended to model
entire battles, computers can employ AI routines
to mimic the limited perspectives of an individual
commander, by masking the full picture and impos-
ing realistic command delays in a way which manual
simulations find harder because their users must
run the whole system rather than just playing indi-
vidual roles within it.6
P. Sabin
324 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
The trouble with computers is that their unpar-
alleled number-crunching abilities tend to encou-
rage the belief that accurate simulation is
primarily a matter of adding more and more para-
meters and increasingly detailed data (Grigsby et al.,
2003; Lead Pursuit, 2005). Manual simulation
designers, in contrast, must perforce focus on iden-
tifying and modelling only the really significant
dynamics in that particular conflict, since their
games would otherwise be completely unplayable.
In a humanities field such as war studies, these
key dynamics are often human rather than techni-
cal, and so are precisely the aspects which modellers
find it hardest to quantify (Sabin, 2007). Manual
wargame designers are used to having to settle for
an output-based, top-down design approach which
gives only an impressionistic flavour of the overall
observed reality, whereas computers seem to offer
the enticing possibility of more input-based,
bottom-up techniques in which the individual com-
ponents of a situation can be modelled in such
detail that outcomes emerge objectively from first
principles rather than through mere subjective
depiction of real experience. Not only does this
Holy Grail of ‘scientific’ objectivity tend to encou-
rage unwieldy levels of detail and complexity, as in
the ongoing agent-based modelling of Byzantine
logistics which can only be run using distributed
simulation across a network of computers (Haldon
et al., 2010), but it also tends to focus the modelling
on quantifiable technicalities at the expense of the
often more significant human element.
Modern first person computer simulations of
infantry combat or aerial dogfights illustrate the
potential problems very well. Despite highly precise
and detailed modelling of equipment characteristics,
weapons effects, and terrain, such computer simula-
tions consistently tend to produce grossly ahistorical
mutual casualty rates, because the individual com-
batants (whether controlled by AI or by real humans
at networked terminals) behave far more boldly
than they would if the bullets were real. Well over
half the computer ‘sorties’ which my students play
to get a feel for how air combat dynamics changed
over time end with them being shot down in flames.
Manual simulations find it much easier to model
the suppressive effect of fire, by simply prohibiting
users from moving or firing with troops who are
pinned down in this way (Barker, 1988; Sabin
2011, ch. 11). Since it is very common indeed for
conflicts to be affected at least as much by such
psychological dynamics as by more calculable phy-
sical parameters, manual simulations can often
identify and capture the ‘big picture’ at least as
effectively as do more detailed and visually striking
computer models (Sabin, 2007). Willard McCarty
put it very well when he wrote that, ‘a model
is by nature a simplified and therefore fictional or
idealized representation, often taking quite a rough-
and-ready form: hence the term ‘‘tinker toy’’ model
from physics, accurately suggesting play, relative
crudity, and heuristic purpose’ (McCarty, 2004,
p. 255).
A further key consideration is that ‘accessibility’
in the simulation field is a complex and double-
edged concept. Computer simulations tend to be
more accessible to users, but harder to programme
and design, so they are best suited to expert-led
situations in which a few highly capable individuals
devote considerable effort to creating a model which
can be learnt and used ‘as is’ by masses of less-qua-
lified people. Manual simulations, in contrast, tend
to be less accessible to users because they need to
master lengthy rules to be able to operate the model
at all, but in the process the users are required
to engage much more directly with the designer’s
ideas and assumptions, and it is a short step from
being able to play a manual simulation to being
able to tweak the rules or even to design entirely
new systems to give a better reflection of one’s
own understanding of the underlying military rea-
lity (Dunnigan, 1992; Sabin, 2011). Hence, manual
simulations are much more accessible from a design
perspective, since one does not need to be a com-
puter programmer to create new systems, and since
using other people’s systems conveys a much better
understanding of design techniques. The manual
simulation system in my last book prompted flour-
ishing online discussions which now amount to
well over twice as many words as there are in the
book itself (Sabin, 2007).7
Many recent computer simulations have sought
to soften their expert-led character by incorporating
provision for simple modification and scenario
Benefits and limits of computerization
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 325
generation by users themselves (Koger, 2006).
However, this flexibility rarely extends to changing
the fundamental systems, and it is actually manual
simulation design which has become radically more
accessible and democratized in the computer age,
thanks to the ease with which individuals can
now design full colour maps and counters and
sell or give away digital copies of their rules and
graphics online without any physical production
or distribution costs.8 Since I believe that designing
simulations for oneself is a far better way of gaining
insight into the dynamics of a real conflict than is
simply playing someone else’s computer game on
that subject, I see the much greater design accessi-
bility of manual simulations as a major reason for
their continued production and relevance, with
computer graphics and online distribution playing
a key role, but without the rules themselves having
to be coded into computer software.
For educational purposes, it is vital to have
design flexibility and not to be limited to commer-
cial products, because published manual and com-
puter wargames alike are generally far too complex
and lengthy to be used by students in a class context
(Garris et al., 2002; Crookall and Thorngate, 2009).
Niall Ferguson has advocated the use of commercial
computer games for history teaching,9 but I have
found specifically tailored manual designs to be
equally effective, and grouping students around
tables with large-scale physical maps and counters
works at least as well as using data projectors or
multiple monitors (Hays, 2005). I now run nine
different manual wargames per year across my
various classes, on topics ranging from the Second
Punic War to the Eastern Front in World War Two,
and all using simple games which I have designed
myself for this purpose (Salen and Zimmerman,
2004; Sabin, 2011). As I write these words, I am
preparing later today to run three simultaneous
refights of the battle of the Korsun Pocket in 1944
with my thirty BA students. Neither I nor my
MA students would be remotely capable of generat-
ing such designs in a fully computerized format,
so the manual approach offers key benefits by
making simulation design directly accessible to
those in the humanities and social sciences
(Moizer et al., 2009).
The central message of this article is that ‘simula-
tion’ and even ‘digitization’ are not necessarily
synonymous with ‘computerization’, as so many
today seem to believe. Military professionals
and enthusiasts have been producing ‘digitized’
mathematical models of conflict since long before
the computer age, and such manual simulations
continue to survive alongside their computerized
counterparts. The biggest challenge they face is
that computer simulations now have much greater
mass market appeal and a much more professional
image within defence and academia. However,
without the broad design accessibility and top-
down focus of manual simulation design, compu-
terized conflict simulation risks becoming an
unduly arcane and detail-obsessed science. I have
even been commissioned to run a full day of
manual wargames for senior British officers this
May, so as to develop their ability to design and
run such simple tailored simulations for themselves
for training and planning purposes. Manual and
computer simulations of conflict will hence
remain complementary endeavours for many years
to come.
So what does all this mean for scholars of digital
humanities? I think the key implication is the need
for balance. Computers are just one tool (albeit
a tremendously powerful one) with which the over-
all methodologies of modelling and simulation
may be pursued. Their number-crunching and
visualization capabilities are unparalleled, but soft-
ware design often appears intimidating and inacces-
sible to non-programmers, who may therefore
eschew ideas of modelling altogether and take
refuge in the traditional qualitative and verbally
based methodologies of humanities teaching and
research. Manual modelling offers a potentially
valuable bridge, which can allow humanities
academics to develop their own modelling
concepts while also weaning programmers and
non-programmers alike away from the double-
edged temptation to seek progress through ever
more complex and comprehensive data inputs. It
provides a lingua franca which all parties (with a
little effort) should be able to comprehend fully,
rather than just take on trust. By helping to foster
truly collaborative rather than merely mutually
P. Sabin
326 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
dependent intellectual relationships, manual model-
ling may pave the way for more widespread and
routine integration of computing capabilities into
humanities teaching and research, thereby yielding
the best of both worlds.