A rationale of digital documentary
editions
............................................................................................................................................................
Elena Pierazzo
Department of Digital Humanities, King’s College London, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Publishing the diplomatic edition of a document on the web instead of in print
implies a series of methodological and practical changes in the nature of the
published text and in the operations to be performed by the editors. For print
the choice of which features to include in the transcription is limited largely by
the limits of the publishing technology. In contrast, the digital medium has
proved to be much more permissive and so editors need new scholarly guidelines
to establish ‘where to stop’. This article discusses a list of criteria and parameters
for choosing which features to include in transcriptions. It also sketches the
theoretical implications which result from the change of medium and technology.
It is argued that the very definition of ‘diplomatic edition’ needs to be substan-
tially revised if the edition is published on the web. Even more importantly, the
discussion argues for the existence of a new editorial object which is generated by
the changed conditions: a new publication form called the ‘digital documentary
edition’ which is composed of the source, the outputs and the tools able to
produce and display them.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
The preparation and publication on the Web of
digital scholarly editions, especially those based on
transcriptions of manuscripts, are at the centre of
lively debate among scholars. In particular, scholars
have tried to answer to the following questions: are
digital editions different from printed ones? If so, in
which ways? Do they represent an advancement of
textual scholarship or just a translation of the same
scholarship into a new medium?1 It is the argument
of this article that editions as we know them from
print culture are substantially different from the
ones we find in a digital medium. They may perhaps
present the material in the same way as their printed
counterpart, as lamented by Robinson (2002), but
they are intrinsically different with respect to trad-
itional editorial models, especially those editions
encoded according to the Guidelines of the Text
Encoding Initiative (TEI).
The discussion that follows2 will try to explain
the reasons behind this statement. The argument
will use as a case study the Jane Austen’s Fiction
Manuscripts Digital Edition, a three-year AHRC
(Arts and Humanities Research Council)-funded
project devoted to the transcription and publication
of Jane Austen’s holographic fictional manuscripts.3
The discussion will focus on some of the theoretical
and practical implications of preparing a diplomatic
edition of the manuscripts and presenting them
side-by-side with their digital facsimiles.
2 Definitions and Theoretical
Framework
2.1 What is a diplomatic edition?
According to its classic definition, a diplomatic edi-
tion comprises a transcription that reproduces as
many characteristics of the transcribed document
Correspondence:
Department of Digital
Humanities,
King’s College London,
London WC2B 5RL, UK.
E-mail:
elena.pierazzo@kcl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
463
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr033 Advance Access published on 28 July 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(the diploma) as allowed by the characters used in
modern print.4 It includes features like line breaks,
page breaks, abbreviations, and differentiated letter
shapes. Recently, for modern manuscripts (especial-
ly draft manuscripts) a new form of diplomatic
edition has been developed which attempts to
reproduce also the topographic collocation of
different writings, including functional signs and
marks, again within the limits of the print
medium. This new type of edition is called super-
diplomatic or type-facsimile. Diplomatic editions
are very expensive, in terms of both production
and, especially, publication. In the print world,
they have been used mainly for documents that
are either very short, very important, or both, or
where a facsimile reproduction was impossible or
infeasible, for example because of cost. The diplo-
matic edition therefore has been, and still is,
considered as a sort of surrogate of a facsimile
edition.
In a digital environment, the cost of publication
(though not necessarily that of production) has
been remarkably reduced, and therefore an increas-
ing number of such editions are now being
published on the web. This fact, combined with
the greater possibilities for representation which
the digital medium allows, has raised a lot of interest
in this type of edition and has generated several
discussions concerning the methodological and
pragmatic problems that have arisen.
Before going further, however, and at the risk of
stating the obvious, it is worth first discussing a
question of terminology which has substantial
implications: namely whether a diplomatic edition
is the same as a transcription. As already discovered
by Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen (2008, p. 296)
the term transcription has been used to denote both
an act (the act of transcribing) and also ‘the product
of that act, that is, a document’, or even ‘the
relationship between documents – one document
may be said to be a transcription of another docu-
ment’. This ambiguity has lead to some confusion in
the literature. Meulen and Tanselle (1999) have used
the word transcription in opposition to critical text
as possible parts of an edition (p. 203).5 Similarly
Gabler (2007) seems to imply that transcriptions
and diplomatic editions are the same thing,
speaking as he does of ‘diplomatic transcription’
(p. 204). In contrast, it is argued here that the
terms transcription and diplomatic edition identify
two very different objects: one a derivative docu-
ment that holds a relationship with the transcribed
document, and the other a formal (public) presen-
tation of such a derivative document. The editor will
first transcribe a primary source, thereby creating
a transcription; this transcription will be corrected,
proofread, annotated, and then prepared for publi-
cation. Once published, this new object will become
a diplomatic edition. The two products will possibly
contain the same text, but while the first will be
a private product, the latter will be a publicly pub-
lished one. These two objects therefore represent
two different stages of the same editorial process,
although the first can exist without the second.
The following discussion will evaluate both these
stages in turn.
2.2 What does a diplomatic edition
contain?
Michael Sperberg-McQueen (2009) declares that
there are three things to consider when we tran-
scribe a text:
(1) There is an infinite set of facts related to the
work being edited.
(2) Any edition records a selection from the
observable and the recoverable portions of
this infinite set of facts.
(3) Each edition provides some specific presenta-
tion of its selection (p. 31, italics original).
His assertion (which is quite correct) that any
edition records only a selection of the facts has
two important logical consequences for transcrip-
tions and diplomatic editions. First, no tran-
scription, however accurate, will ever be able to
represent entirely (i.e. faithfully) the source docu-
ment. Some characteristics of the manuscript are
irredeemably lost by transcribing it, for instance
the variable shape and spacing of handwritten
glyphs versus the constant shape of digital fonts or
typescripts. As Hans Walter Gabler (2007) says,
‘clearly the diplomatic transcription is already a dis-
tinct abstraction from the document’ (p. 204). This
fact is also clearly recognized by Meulen and
E. Pierazzo
464 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Tanselle (1999): ‘Obviously a transcription cannot
exactly reproduce the relative precision or careless-
ness with which handwritten letters are formed, or
their relative sizes, or the amount of space between
words and lines’ (p. 201). This point is worth
emphasizing for reasons that will be clear shortly.
Secondly, if every editor necessarily selects from an
infinite set of facts, it is evident that any transcrip-
tion represents an interpretation and not a mechan-
ically complete record of what is on the page.
The process of selection is inevitably an interpret-
ative act: what we choose to represent and what we
do not depends either on the particular vision that
we have of a particular manuscript or on practical
constraints. As Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen
(2008) argued, ‘the concept of transcription largely
consists in a systematic program of selective
alteration, coupled with selective preservation of
information’ (p. 302). This was written as a
response to a declaration by Meulen and Tanselle
(1999) in which those authors affirm that the con-
cept of transcription cannot be associated with one
of alteration:
numerous discussions of the subject, includ-
ing some of the most influential, allow for
making certain classes of alteration when tran-
scribing manuscript texts, as if a conscious
program of alteration is compatible with the
concept of transcription (pp. 201–02).
However this statement contradicts a passage that
immediately precedes it, in which the role of the
transcriber (editor) in making informed choices
and decisions is brought to light:
Judgment is necessarily involved in deciding
what is in fact present [in the manuscript],
as when an ambiguously formed character
resembles two different letters; but the tran-
scriber’s goal is to make an informed decision
about what is actually inscribed at each point
(Meulen and Tanselle, 1999, p. 201).
This leads in turn to the canonical distinction
between record and interpretation made by Hans
Zeller, a distinction which has deeply influenced
contemporary German editorial theory (Zeller,
1995 and in general Gabler et al., 1995) and which
clearly distinguishes what is on the page (Befund)
from the interpretation of this phenomenon
(Deutung). It is the opinion of this author that
this distinction has proven to be largely artificial.
As argued elsewhere, selection at least is an inter-
pretative act from which alterations inevitably
spring.
What is the nature of those alterations performed
as a direct consequence of any editorial act?
Huitfeldt and Sperberg-McQueen (2008) seem to
consider such alterations to be substitution
(p. 302). On the other hand, Robinson and
Solopova have argued that editorial alterations are
acts of translation and not of substitution:
transcription of a primary textual source
cannot be regarded as an act of substitution,
but as a series of acts of translation from one
semiotic system (that of the primary source)
to another semiotic system (that of the
computer). Like all acts of translation, it
must be seen as fundamentally incomplete
and fundamentally interpretative (Robinson
and Solopova, 1993, p. 21).
Most probably the authors of the aforementioned
articles agree on the substance, if not on the termin-
ology. But, whatever the nature of the relationship
between exemplar and transcript, it is clear that the
alterations which lead from the former to the latter
are interpretative and irreversible: two scholars,
given the same transcriptional criteria, are most
likely not to produce the same transcription of the
same exemplar; furthermore it is impossible to use a
transcription to reconstruct the exact substance and
appearance of the exemplar, assuming that one
can tell them apart. The alterations performed by
the editor are only partially accountable and
documentable.
If a transcription consists of ‘a systematic
program of selective alteration’ (Huitfeldt and
Sperberg-McQueen, 2008, p. 302) and is a substan-
tially interpretative act, is it then possible to main-
tain some level of objectivity in performing such
operations? According to Claus Huitfeldt (2006)
the answer seems to be yes: ‘Thus we may conclude
that there is such a thing as objectivity of interpret-
ation: the vast majority of decisions we make in this
Digital documentary editions
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011 465
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
realm are decisions on which all (or most) compe-
tent readers agree or seem likely to agree’ (p. 196).
This conclusion comes after an affirmation that
representation and interpretation (‘the subjective
and the objective’) are not a dichotomy but the
two extremes of a continuum. The argument of
social agreement seems to be supported by Peter
Robinson when he wrote that ‘An ‘‘i’’ is not an
‘‘i’’ because it is a stroke with a dot over it.
An ‘‘i’’ is an ‘‘i’’ because we all agree that it is an
‘‘i’’’ (Robinson, 2009, p. 44). These scholars seem
then to imply that objectivity is defined exclusively
by mutual agreement: if scholars as competent read-
ers agree on something, then by this definition that
thing is objective. However, this definition, and
particularly its implied emphasis on scholarly opin-
ion, is at odds with the received definition of the
word objectivity: ‘the ability to consider or represent
facts, information, etc., without being influenced by
personal feelings or opinions’ (OED). In fact (and,
to be fair, this is present more or less implicitly in
the argument of both Huitfeldt and Robinson) the
transcription of what is on the page is perceived by
Huitfeldt (2006) as ‘less objective and relievable’
than that which can be measured or handled mech-
anically (p.195). Perhaps then we should simply say
that the notion of objectivity is not very productive
or helpful in the case of transcription and subse-
quently of diplomatic editions and that we should
instead make peace with the fact that we are simply
doing our work as scholars when transcribing and
preparing a diplomatic edition. In place of the
unachievable universal truth of objectivity it is
argued here for informed, circumspect, docu-
mented, scholarly interpretation. We should there-
fore conclude that a diplomatic edition, like any
other edition, is an interpretative, scholarly product,
based on the selection of features transcribed from
a specific primary source.
2.3 Selection as scholarly activity:
where to stop
Scholarly choices constitute the base of any
transcription and subsequent diplomatic edition.
But that then raises the question how to choose.
Which features of the primary source are we to
reproduce in order to be sure that we are following
‘best practice’? Are there any shared guidelines
to inform our choices? Where shall we stop?
According to Tanselle (1978) ‘the editor’s goal is
to reproduce in print as many of the characteristics
of the document as he can’ (p. 51). This statement is
of very little help in a digital context where the
medium is so much less limiting, as clearly declared
by Driscoll (2006) while commenting on the possi-
bilities offered to those encoding with TEI: ‘to all
intents and purposes there is no limit to the infor-
mation one can add to a text—apart, that is, from
the limits of the imagination’ (p. 261). Forcing
Driscoll’s words a little, we might conclude that
one possible and tempting answer to the question
‘where to stop’ could be ‘nowhere’, as there are
potentially infinite sets of facts to be recorded.
Nevertheless such an answer opens the field to
more theoretical and practical concerns.
When Sperberg-McQueen states that an edition
records a selection of facts, he implies that a tran-
scription/diplomatic edition behaves as a model of
the physical object (the manuscript).6 If we pursue
this line then, if there is an infinite set of facts to be
observed within the physical object, ‘no limits’
might lead us to create a model which aspires to
equal the object to be studied. But a model must
be simpler than the object it models, otherwise it
will be unusable for any practical purpose. This is
a fact that has been demonstrated by the ‘fathers’ of
the theory of models:
Let the model approach asymptotically the
complexity of the original situation. It will
tend to become identical with that original
system. As a limit it will become that system
itself . . . . Lewis Carroll fully expressed this
notion in an episode in Sylvie and Bruno,
when he showed that the only completely
satisfactory map to scale of a given country
was that country itself. (Rosenblueth and
Wiener, 1945, p. 320).
So, we must have limits, and limits represent the
boundaries within which the hermeneutic process
can develop. The challenge is therefore to select
those limits that allow a model which is adequate
E. Pierazzo
466 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to the scholarly purpose for which it has been
created.
In print, it appears that the limits are set by what
can be represented by the typographic characters
and by the printing house, as declared by Meulen
and Tanselle (1999): ‘by ‘‘transcription’’ we mean
the effort to report—insofar as typography
allows—precisely what the textual inscription of
a manuscript consists of’ (p. 201). In the digital
environment, however, the possibilities of the web
extend far beyond the recoding of the features rec-
ommended by Tanselle (1978) such as punctuation,
spelling, letter shape (long s, i-j, u-v, for instance),
capitalization, abbreviations, authorial errors,
deleted readings, and added texts (maintaining or
marking their positioning) (pp. 50–51); one can
compare this list with the so-called ultra diplomatic
editions which integrate transcription and fac-
simile as found in Gabler’s (2007) The Primacy of
Document in Editing (p. 205; compare also Elsschot,
2007). The Austen Digital Edition itself offers
sophisticated ways of presenting the interlinear
insertions, and superimposed and displaced correc-
tions which exemplify some of the options offered
by the web. It is clear that we have just started to test
the limits of the digital environment and so we
cannot use these limits of the medium as a prag-
matic answer to the question ‘where to stop’.
In addition, to do this will also be allowing the
technology to drive scholarly choices, something
Michael Hunter warns against when he remarks
that what is possible is not necessarily useful:
An electronic edition is like an iceberg, with
far more data potentially available than is
actually visible on the screen, and this is at
the same time a great opportunity and a
temptation to overdo things. When so many
possibilities exist, there is a danger of techno-
logical considerations of what can be done
taking priority over intellectual considerations
of what is actually desirable or necessary in
any particular case (Hunter, 2007, p. 71).
The limits established by print technology have
too often offered an easy answer to the question
where to stop: in fact, the best practice
recommendations for printed editions could equally
qualify as the kind of technology-based decisions
which Hunter warned against (Tanselle, 1978;
Meulen and Tanselle, 1999). It is only with the
advent of digital editions that we have started to
understand that what we need is scholarly guidance
on our decision making process, that we need to
rethink the reasons why we make our transcriptions,
and that this approach should apply to print and
digital editions alike.
2.4 A grid of features
While transcribing, while translating (or substitut-
ing) the symbols in the manuscript page into the
graphemes that are available from the tool the
editor is using for transcription, informed choices
need to be made on what to include because it is
relevant and what can be safely omitted. In order to
make these choices, we must understand which fea-
tures are present in the exemplar. Let us therefore
try to list the most common features one might
want to consider from the infinite set of ‘facts’
that can be found on the written page:
 Documentary features: dimensions, inks, tears,
alterations to the integrity of the physical object.
 Topology: structure and layout of the document,
collocation of writings and other features in the
writing surface.
 Handwriting: number of hands, letter shapes,
ligatures.
 Orthography: spelling, diacritics.
 Writing features: which can be split into:
 Reading facilitators: capitalization, punctu-
ation, spacing.
 Shorthands: abbreviations, symbols, cyphers.
 Genesis: revisions, deletions, additions, func-
tional marks and other evidence about how the
content of the document was produced.
 Textuality: paragraphs, headings, verses, tables,
lists, rubrics and other structural divisions.
 Semantics: dates, names of people, of places,
keywords.
 Linguistics: part of speech, lemmatization,
syntax.
Digital documentary editions
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011 467
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
 Decorations and other graphical components:
miniatures, drawings, doodles.
 Others: infinite.
While some of these parameters correspond to
graphic evidence on the writing surface (letter
shapes, ligatures, graphic components), others
represent meta-information, such as dimensions,
or qualifications of words in terms of both seman-
tics and grammatical functions. While the former
group of features can be represented with more or
less any system of transcription, the latter can be
recorded only by using some types of writing and
editing system: for instance an XML (TEI)-based
system will satisfy this requirement, while a plain
or unstructured text format will hardly be fit for
the job. In other words we need a system that
allows the shift from the mimetic to the analytic
level of the editing process. It is important to note
that while many of the previous considerations
could be applied to any kind of digital transcription,
the ones that follow assume that the technology
chosen by the editor is some sort of markup lan-
guage or a technology that allows the recording of
meta-information in the way described above,
possibly following the TEI Guidelines (TEI
Consortium 2009). The act of transcribing will
therefore now be considered together with the act
of encoding the transcribed information. It is
beyond the scope of this article to investigate
conceptual transformation and the level of compu-
tational literacy required of the editor when she
or he becomes an encoder (a recent discussion of
which can be found in Sutherland and Pierazzo,
2011); it must be sufficient here to mention that
this is not necessarily a smooth or painless evolution
and that it comports all sorts of theoretical and
practical consequences (Vanhoutte, 2000;
McLouglin, 2010; Rehbein, 2010).
When starting a transcription for the purpose
of providing a digital diplomatic edition, the fea-
tures listed above need to be considered one by
one for inclusion in one’s criteria. In this analysis
decisions are taken according to five parameters:
(1) The purpose of the edition (or the needs of
the editors);
(2) The needs of the others (prospected readers,
scholars);
(3) The nature of the document;
(4) The capabilities of the publishing technology;
(5) The costs of encoding/the amount of time
available for the job.
Features and parameters can then be then orga-
nized into a table (Table 1).
Table 1 Grid of features
Purpose of edition Readers Nature of document Publishing technology Costs
Document
Topology
Handwriting
Orthography
Reading Facilitators
Shorthands
Genesis
Textuality
Semantic
Linguistics
Decorations
Other
E. Pierazzo
468 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
These parameters will be now discussed in turn.
2.5 Costs
The examination of the parameters will start with
the last one, as it is the one normally considered the
fundamental discriminating criterion, namely the
cost of encoding and the time available for
the job. The following statement from Marilyn
Deegan may exemplify this general attitude (words
which are strikingly reminiscent of Driscoll’s (2006)
with their reference to the imagination as the ultim-
ate limit for digital editions): ‘In this new world, the
limits are not what will fit on the page or between
covers. The new constraints are time and money;
with a sufficiency of both, the technology will
allow us to go as far as our imagination leads’
(Deegan, 2006, p. 361).
We all know how important economic consider-
ations are in our decision-making processes; almost
all of our research projects are funded for a specific
time-span and budget, and so it is fundamental to
ensure that the transcription (and encoding) is feas-
ible within this lifetime. The decision whether or
not to encode a specific feature will be heavily deter-
mined by the cost of encoding it, and it would be
naive not to admit this. Economic considerations
may then be used as the pragmatic limits of the
level of transcription we are looking for, in the
same way that the limits of the typography worked
for print-based publications; indeed this parameter
enforced some choices for the Austen Digital
Edition, as will be mentioned in the following
sections. On the other hand one may well argue
that such decisions should be scholarly rather than
economic, and, even within the limitations of
budget, guidance on best practice is desirable to
ensure that the money is well spent.
2.6 The purpose of the edition, or the
needs of the editors
According to Robinson (2009), ‘decisions about
what one should encode and should not encode
are to be determined according the purpose of our
encoding’ (p. 46): this is certainly true, but it needs
to be refined a little to be really useful. To achieve
the purpose of the edition and meet the editors’
needs, one needs to ask which features bear a
cognitive value, that is, which are relevant from a
scholarly point of view.
In order to exemplify this point some of the
editorial practices of the Jane Austen’s Fiction
Manuscripts Digital Edition will be presented.7
The purpose of the project was to offer a reliable
scholarly diplomatic transcription of the surviving
autograph manuscripts, together with high quality
facsimiles of the same manuscripts, with the aim of
favouring the study of the genetic process of such
manuscripts along with the linguistic and ortho-
graphic habits of the author. The manuscripts con-
stituting this corpus can be classified as working
drafts and fair copies, at least some of which were
also confidential publications, that is, shared among
a group of readers.
2.6.1 Topological description
Page and line breaks have been preserved as well as
other layout features such as right or centre align-
ments of paragraphs, headings, and other blocks of
texts, limited to a certain amount of precision. In
some of the fair copies in particular the layout was
carefully planned by the author with the apparent
intention of imitating printed books, and so
such features have been considered essential charac-
teristics of the documents. It is worth mentioning
that this and some of the other features that are
explained further below have not been included
just because they happened to be ‘on the page’,
but because they could possibly give an insight
into a particular aspect of Austen’s manuscript
(work) production which had not hitherto been
studied.
2.6.2 Handwriting and letter shapes
Normal s and long s (
R
) have been distinguished.
Austen’s handwriting is surprisingly little studied
(if at all) and this allowed to obtain statistical
measures about her writing habits.
2.6.3 Spelling and diacritics
Austen’s favoured spellings have been preserved and
marked, such as the inversion of the diphthong
ie into ei (as in friend spelt freind). Her different
methods for marking word breaks have also been
preserved, and the different lengths of her dashes,
Digital documentary editions
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011 469
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
in order to measure writing habits, consistency, and
rate of variation within and amongst manuscripts,
types of manuscript, and time-periods. The decision
was made to record three different lengths of dash:
short, medium and long. These lengths have been
measured in an approximate and relative way;
relative in that the length was considered only com-
pared to others within the given manuscript. With a
corpus of documents ranging from when Austen’s
teenager years to her death, and with gaps of dec-
ades between some documents, it was not con-
sidered meaningful to compare the absolute length
of (say) a short dash in the Juvenilia with that of her
last working manuscripts. The decision to measure
the length approximately was driven by the consid-
eration that the author was not using a ruler while
writing; hence, if she did indeed attribute any mean-
ing to the length of dashes, she must have been able
to appreciate it by sight.
2.6.4 Capitalization and punctuation
Capital letters were preserved and marked; Austen
used these inconsistently for any part of speech, so
we have distinguished nouns, verbs, pronouns,
adjectives, articles, and adverbs. The original fluctu-
ating punctuation was also kept.
2.6.5 What was not encoded
What was left behind or represented loosely is
the exact location of the interlinear insertions.
Handwriting does not have regular spacing nor
regular dimension, therefore, once digitized, the
reproduction of its relative and absolute positioning
on the screen is very difficult to achieve. The coord-
inates of every letter could have been specified but it
has been thought unreasonable and ultimately
beyond the scope of the edition for at least two
reasons: first, it would have given very little insight
into Austen’s way of working and, second, it would
have been enormously time consuming. In fact,
it has been considered that to understand the way
Austen worked (which is one of the purposes of the
edition) it was enough to represent insertions
positioned in the interlinear space only approxi-
mately: the availability of the facsimile would do
the rest.
Linguistic features have not been encoded, either
from a semantic or a grammatical point of view,
except that the part of speech for capitalized
words other than nouns was indicated. Similarly,
any ‘proper’ genetic markup was not included:
while this was a desirable outcome of the project
and fitted the purpose of the edition, it could not
be managed in the time available for the job.
Furthermore, genetic markup was not yet available
in TEI at the time of the project: a group had been
formed for this purpose, collecting the needs of the
Austen Digital Edition together with many others,
but the results arrived too late to be included in
the present project phase.8
2.7 The needs of the others
From the editors’ interpretation of the text and of
the author(s) intentions it is necessary now to con-
sider the readers of the edition and ask what must
be added to the edition itself to satisfy their needs
and expectations. Arguably some of the choices
made by the editors can be motivated both by the
purpose of the edition and by the needs of the read-
ers, and one might also argue that making an
accessible edition is one purpose of the edition.
Nevertheless the distinction is still useful, based as
it is on editorial interpretation on the one hand
(‘the purpose of the edition’) and what it takes to
make such interpretation clearly intelligible on the
other (‘the needs of the others’).
The potential users of a digital edition can be
grouped into two categories:
(1) The intended target (scholars, students, prob-
ably of the same discipline as the editors).
(2) The Others, which can be split in two further
categories:
(a) Scholars of other disciplines who may
approach the edition for purposes
which we cannot foresee.
(b) Generic readers.
The problem of the two audiences (readers who are
scholars of the same discipline and readers who are
not) has been well described by John Lavagnino
(2009); it is not a new problem, but only with digital
publication have editors started to face it in a more
substantial way. While books are standard devices
E. Pierazzo
470 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the function of which is more or less always the
same (but again see Lavagnino, 2009), websites are
very different from each other, and the fact that
users can use (i.e. find the information in) one
does not imply that they can use any other.
Therefore website creators and, among them, digital
editors must consider the needs of the users when
preparing their publication and, in consequence,
considerations about what kind of users to expect
and how to meet their needs have become a
common concern for any kind of digital
publication.
Two objects in particular have been outlined
as the most representative embodiment of the
inaccessibility of the traditional (printed) scholar-
ship: the critical apparatus and genetic editions,
including diplomatic transcriptions.9 A way out
from the obscurities of transcriptions of modern
manuscripts (the ‘confusion of brackets’: Hunter,
2007)10 has been indicated by Gre´sillon (1994, pp.
195–202) and also by Pierazzo (2009, pp. 171–73):
namely digital editions where instead of cryptic
symbols (like the ones used for the edition of
Flaubert’s He´rodias (1991)) one can use functions
and actions which more intuitively disentangle the
intricacies of the source document. In the Austen
Digital Edition’s website, for example, users can
read an underlying text covered by a superimposed
new reading by passing the mouse over a colour-
coded section in the same way one would have used
a magnifying glass.
But for editors of digital (diplomatic) editions,
the needs of users influence not only the publication
side (the front-end or interface) but also the schol-
arly model that determines the transcription.
As Alois Pichler (1995) correctly notes:
The aim of transcription has often been
defined as ‘to represent the original manu-
scripts as correctly as possible’ . . . . Whom
do we want to serve with our transcriptions?
Philosophers? Grammarians? Or grapholo-
gists? What is ‘correct’ will depend on the
answer to this question (p. 690).
In the case of the Austen Digital Edition, for in-
stance, consideration of potential users has driven
our treatment of abbreviations: while an expert
reader will have no problem in understanding
abbreviated words, other users will probably prefer
the possibility of seeing all words expanded. It was
therefore decided to expand the abbreviations,
leaving to the user the option of switching these
expansions on and off at their pleasure.
How far should we go in considering the needs of
the Others? It depends: if it is a matter of simplify-
ing the lives of readers by decrypting the idiosyn-
cratic habits of textual scholarship, the answer
should probably be: ‘quite a long way’. On the
other hand, if it is matter of considering the needs
of possible future scholars in other disciplines and
providing special markup for them, the temptation
is to say: ‘not far’. There is, in fact, a serious risk of
wasting precious project time here: it is very difficult
to guess other scholars’ needs or principles which
are, potentially, infinite—as infinite as the set of
‘facts’ that can be derived from the document.
2.8 The nature of the document
The same kind of features present in different types
of manuscripts may need to be treated differently.
Let us consider two examples: a richly illuminated
manuscript and a calligramme (a text in which the
typeface, calligraphy or handwriting is arranged in
a way that creates a visual image). In both cases the
editor will need to decide whether to include precise
information about the graphical components of the
manuscript or just transcribe the text: the decision
and the selection will reflect the purpose and
intended use of the transcription, but it will prob-
ably also be influenced by the different purposes of
the graphic insertions (on the one hand decorative,
on the other organic to the text).
Draft manuscripts often require a lot of effort to
decipher or order the textual content, where uncon-
ventional or unpredictable layouts witness the gen-
etic process of such a document. In those cases an
editor might wish to include accurate topological
information in the transcription or to order the
different revisions chronologically. For the Austen
Digital Edition, for instance, the layout of the docu-
ments has been respected (within some limits): in
the fair copies and in particular in the Juvenilia
it was clear that Austen intended to produce
manuscripts that mimicked printed books, and so
Digital documentary editions
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011 471
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
elements of the layout have been considered as
organic to the transmitted texts. Elsewhere, specif-
ically in the working draft manuscripts, the layout
was captured in a slightly different way and for a
different reason: deletions, additions and substitu-
tions have been preserved, marked and displayed as
closely as possible to the original position and
layout, in an attempt to extricate the minutiae of
the revision process.
2.9 The capabilities of the publishing
technology
Even if it is true that a digital edition can represent
many more features than a print publication can, we
know that the web has some limitations: we cannot,
for instance, reproduce easily some of the calli-
grammes mentioned before in HTML, the technol-
ogy which dominates the web today. Even more
problematic is the representation of inconsistent
baselines or the variable size of graphs. If the display
of a given feature cannot be achieved within the
chosen technical infrastructure, then editors have
several choices:
 Record the information anyway (in the XML,
for instance): sooner or later the publishing
technology will allow for it.11
 Avoid recording the information: it is pointless
and time consuming if no output is to be
expected.
 Select a different output technology.12
For instance, in the Austen Digital Edition the
struggle has been to position the interlinear inser-
tions where they were in the original manuscripts.
The varying dimension and spacing of the hand-
writing made the attempt to reproduce it very
difficult: every word has been isolated and moved
according to its relative position using CSS-based
coding. The attempts have not been entirely success-
ful and sometimes a less precise approximation
than the one that was hoped for had to be accepted,
but it is hoped that what is recorded will suffice to
help the reader to understand the author’s revision
habits. Furthermore, as the edition is to be
presented side by side with the facsimile, the user
is able to verify the exact documentary layout
her- or himself.
3 The Facsimile
This reference to the facsimile leads to a further
question. The inclusion or otherwise of a facsimile
has been evoked in the preceding discussion as a
discriminating factor in selecting the appropriate
level of transcription: if a facsimile is included
then it may reduce the need for details in the tran-
scription. Are the parameters for selection given
above therefore to be influenced by the presence
of a facsimile in the publication website? Kevin
Kiernan (2006) suggests they are, and indeed takes
this idea still further: ‘the image-based scholarly
edition subsumes the purpose of a diplomatic edi-
tion and removes the fruitless frustration of trying
to preserve the exact layout, illumination, and phys-
ical appearance of a manuscript in printed form’
(p. 266). Michael Hunter (2007) seems to be of
the same opinion: ‘those particularly interested in
a writer’s methods of composition always have the
alternative of recourse to a photographic or digital
reproduction. Such consultation is preferable to
even the most elaborate type-facsimile’ (p. 75).
This is a position that requires some thought.
It states that a diplomatic edition is a pointless
product when you are able to access (and pub-
lish) the (digital) pictures of the manuscript. This
implies that a diplomatic edition is simply an
imperfect attempt to reproduce the original
document, while the image is a more perfect
reproduction of it.
This implication can be discussed from two
different points of view. First, as was argued earlier,
a diplomatic edition is the result of an editor’s
interpretation, of which the type-facsimile layout
is one possible embodiment. If a diplomatic edition
is a non-objective, interpretative operation, then it
follows that is also a scholarly activity and can be
justified on these grounds, in the same way that
a critical edition can, with both presenting the
scholarly and computational analysis of the chosen
textual phenomena. It is true that a diplomatic
edition is not a surrogate for the manuscript when
a facsimile is also present, but it is rather a set of
functions and activities to be derived from
the manuscript which challenge the editorial
work and force a more total engagement of the
E. Pierazzo
472 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
editor with the source document. As Kathryn
Sutherland notes:
In a non-facsimile printed scholarly edition
the diplomatic transcription normally stands
in for the manuscript, ensuring that it is not
the manuscript that provides authority for the
edition but the implied precision of the edi-
tor’s translation. By contrast, in the
image-based digital edition the editor is
continually on trial, open to account and
correction (Sutherland and Pierazzo, 2011).
The dialectic relationship between the diplomatic
edition and the facsimile representation, while
demanding extreme editorial rigour, engages the
users in close inspection of the translations enacted
by the editor in a sort of ideal, involving,
competition.
The second criticism of the suggestion that fac-
simile editions supplant diplomatic ones arises from
the very nature of the digital diplomatic edition,
which is a composite, complex, scholarly-informed
and at the same time transient object. The facsimile
is a very poor surrogate for this, as we will soon
discover.
4 Documentary Digital Editions
In the digital world, and especially for TEI users,
we are now used to thinking of the data model
(the source) and the publication (the output) as
two separate objects. The type-facsimile or docu-
ment layout is only one of the possible outputs of
the source and perhaps not the most meaningful.
In the Austen Digital Edition, for instance, users
are allowed to modify the output by switching on
and off abbreviations, line breaks, deletions, and
additions; in this way the output ranges from a
diplomatic to a reading view of the text. These pos-
sibilities offered by digital editions based on markup
languages (and in particular those based on TEI) are
not new or complicated at all. However, they do
imply that we should redefine what we mean by
diplomatic edition. According to the definition
given at the beginning of this article, a diplomatic
edition is a published version of a transcription
which reproduces as many of the characteristics of
the original document as the medium permits or as
the project requires. On the other hand, an edition
based on text encoding will normally be composed
of many parts, including at a minimum the
following:
 A source file (or files) which will contain the
transcribed text. At the current time XML–TEI
markup represents the best practice of text
encoding in the Humanities, but other formats
are (and will continue to be) possible as well.
One of the reasons why the TEI model is parti-
cualry effective is because it enables the encoding
and transcription of several alternatives for
the same segment allowing, for example, the
encoding of abbreviated forms along with the
expanded ones, or of erroneous passages and
their editorial corrections.
 A set of scripts able to read the source file and
transform it into some particular ‘view’ of the
text. The scripts therefore express which combin-
ation of encoded features compose the particular
views. These scripts will typically be XSLT or
XQuery if the source file is XML.
 One or more outputs, each of which will repre-
sent one of the aforementioned views or, to use a
more established word, one ‘edition’. This may
include a diplomatic view if the editors have
decided that this is a purpose of the edition.
 One or more styling files to refine the display of
the edition. For output in HTML, this role will
typically be filled by some combination of
CSS and JavaScript.
So, where is the diplomatic edition? Let us
suppose that the transcription is recorded as an
XML source file: in this case the transcription file
will not look like the original document in any
meaningful way. The output displays the transcribed
text as closely as possible to the original document,
but it is the scripts that store the knowledge (the
scholarship) of how to produce such an edition.
One might use a culinary metaphor here: the
source contains the ingredients, the scripts contain
the recipe, and the output represents the cooked
dish. This metaphor works, but only to a certain
level of abstraction because while the source
Digital documentary editions
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011 473
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
contains the ingredients to produce the edition, it
can in many circumstances be considered an edition
by itself: for a TEI expert, for instance, an XML
source file will be even more eloquent that the
output. This consideration undermines an other-
wise tempting classification: having said at the be-
ginning that transcription represents the private first
stage of editorial work with the source manuscript,
while the diplomatic edition represents its public
(published) face, one could argue that this division
of work is reflected in the source as transcription
and the output as diplomatic edition. However,
as we have just observed, the source file can be con-
sidered an edition by itself (especially when
XML–TEI is used), and in fact the importance of
published source files as scholarly products has been
widely recognized (Bodard and Garce´s, 2009). The
question can be pushed even further: in the case of
the Austen Digital Edition, the diplomatic output is
interactive and can be modified by the users, mean-
ing that diplomatic is only one of the possible, un-
stable, states of the output; we might therefore
conclude that this is not a diplomatic edition after
all. But perhaps one of the most important aspects
of such practice is that, assuming that the text is
encoded using the TEI Guidelines or using a very
similar approach enabling multiple outputs, while
the source file contains a diplomatic edition, it
may also contains other editions—semi-diplomatic,
reading, critical, interpretative, or others—all of
which can be contained simultaneously in potentia
within the same source file, with each of these edi-
tions requiring the application of different sets of
scripts and styling to be realized. This proteiform,
cumulative nature of digital editions challenges on
the one hand the concept of a single edited text.
Which is ‘the text’? The redundant, paradigmatically
encoded text or one of the many possible outputs?
Similarly challenged on the other hand is the com-
monly accepted way of distinguishing different
editorial products, namely the different levels of
editorial intervention. The handling of features
such as corrections of scribal errors, preservation
of original spellings, layout and paginations are
normally used to distinguish diplomatic from
semi-diplomatic from reading editions, with each
of them characterized by an increasing weight of
editorial intervention. For digital editions based on
text encoding the editorial interventions are all
present at once in the source, they are just not
displayed at once.
The picture becomes even more complex if we
consider that scripts and stylesheets are also normal-
ly used to produce intermediate outputs. During the
editorial process one often needs to produce differ-
ent views of the text, such as tabular pre-publication
views, list of words, etc. These may have the twofold
use of helping the editor check the consistency and
progress of the work, but also providing documen-
tation of the editorial practices which so often are
only briefly outlined in the introductory material of
traditional printed editions. These documentary
by-products of the editorial work have been defined
as mesotext by Peter Boot, who has claimed them as
a fundamental part of the editorial work in a digital
framework (Boot, 2007). Scripts and stylesheets,
then, far from being only the realm of the ‘techies’,
store, for instance, the knowledge of how to exploit
the dynamism implied in the redundant, paradig-
matic TEI markup.13 The role of programming
within the system described above is therefore not
to be underestimated, and neither is its implicit
scholarly content.
At a different level, styling scripts in a language
like CSS (or indeed JavaScript) are also of capital
importance in modern, best-practice HTML web-
sites. Again the Austen Digital Edition can give an
iconic demonstration of this affirmation: one has
just to try to display any of the pages containing
the diplomatic edition14 after disabling the CSS
(a function available on most browsers), or to
open it within a text-only browser such as Lynx,
for instance, to understand that the more we try
to find out what a diplomatic edition is in a digital
environment, the more this concept becomes
inclusive and therefore elusive.
Perhaps we should just stop trying to map digital
editions to printed ones and instead recognize that
we are producing a different type of object, one that
we can perhaps call a documentary digital edition.
This new object necessarily comprises all three
components of a digital publication—the source,
the output and the tools to produce and display
it—and it is worth emphasizing again that all
E. Pierazzo
474 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 4, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
three are scholarly products that result from
editorial practice.
The discussion of the features listed previously
and the parameters for choosing the level of tran-
scription that is appropriate to a specific project
shows that the principal drive behind the
decision-making process should be the purpose of
the edition. Nevertheless, this argument leaves open
the answer to questions like ‘Where to stop’ or
‘Which features should I include’. The discussion
has demonstrated that one cannot declare once
and for all which features should be included.
In a famous article Tanselle (1978) listed the essen-
tial features that need to be retained in a diplomatic
transcription of modern holographic documents
(pp. 50–51), but such lists are neither possible nor
desirable for digital editions: in fact the editor’s goal
needs no longer be ‘to reproduce in print as many
of the characteristics of the document as he can’
(p. 50) but rather to achieve the scholarly purpose
of the edition—a purpose which, by definition,
varies.
From the discussion it follows that we could
define this new type of editorial object, the docu-
mentary digital edition, as the recording of as many
features of the original document as are considered
meaningful by the editors, displayed in all the ways
the editors consider useful for the readers, including
all the tools necessary to achieve such a purpose.
The discussion has also proved how a digital
edition is something completely different with
respect to a print-based one as it is made of different
things, works differently, and implies different
approaches to the text. In his Foreword to
Electronic Textual Editing Tanselle (2006) declares
‘Printed and electronic renderings [sic!] are thus
not ontologically different; they may be made of
different physical materials, but the conceptual
status of the text in each case is identical’ (p. 6).
However this assertion is hard to sustain. When it
comes to digital editing most of the print-oriented
questions and the recommendations for good-
practice that Tanselle outlined are not only not cen-
tral but mostly not applicable in the new medium.
Printed and digital editions may have the same
function, namely to make a given text available to
an audience, but the way they have to be prepared,
the kind of questions the editor needs to answer,
and ultimately their very natures are substantially,
if not ontologically, different.