Finding stories in the archive
through paragraph alignment
............................................................................................................................................................
Weijia Xu and Maria Esteva
Texas Advanced Computing Center, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX, USA
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Referring to the concept of archival bond, we define stories as formed by docu-
ments that relate to a target activity and developed a method called paragraph
alignment to find these documents. The method computes archival bond by
measuring the cosine similarity between document paragraphs. We tested the
method in a chaotic case study collection created in a shared server by different
authors. Results demonstrate that this method is more efficient to find stories
than calculating the cosine similarity between entire documents. This research
helps archivists make sense of collections that are considered inaccessible and
whose stories may otherwise be lost.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
As primary sources, archival collections are unique
windows to people and organizations. Finding aids
created by archivists point to the location of docu-
ments in a collection and show the relationships
between them across time and provenance. This
access tool allows researcher to find stories in the
archive and provides the contextual information
that enables making sound inferences and interpret-
ations. And yet, due to the unorganized condition
that characterizes many contemporary electronic
document collections, their stories may remain
buried in the archive.
We refer to collections such as those found on
shared organizational servers, in which over time
employees deposit work documents in idiosyncratic
fashion (Henry, 2003). Ubiquitous in the modern
workplace and rich in work experiences, these col-
lective aggregations are perceived as chaotic, dex-
fined as ROT (redundant, outdated, and trivial),
and deemed disposable by some archivists and re-
cords managers who find—and justifiably so—that
they cannot make sense of them and consequently
describe them for access (Public Record Office,
2000; Henry, 2003; AIIM, 2009). Considering the
concept of archival bond we developed a method
to recover the documents that form stories. We con-
ceive stories as narratives about a specific activity
that may span time, organizational areas, and cre-
ators. A story may include similar texts as well as
documents that differ in length, style, and that may
contain parts of other stories.
In archival theory, archival bond describes the
relationships between documents in a collection as
essential properties of the documents (Duranti,
1997). While all the documents are bonded through
the collection’s organization structure (McNeil,
2000), there are stronger relationships between
sub-groups of documents that belong to the same
activity. In controlled electronic record keeping
systems, indexes, time stamps, metadata, and
record-keeping rules are manifestations of archival
bond, and thus of the relationships between docu-
ments. In the case of chaotic document collections
in which the collection’s structure is blurry, we sug-
gest that archival bond be based on the documents’
content referring to a target activity. We designed a
Correspondence:
Weijia Xu, 10100 Burnet
Road, ROC 1.101 (Bldg. 196)
R8700, Austin, TX
78758-4497, USA.
E-mail:
xwj@tacc.utexas.edu
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
359
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr017 Advance Access published on 13 May 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
method called paragraph alignment (PA) to com-
pute archival bond and find the documents that
narrate the story of an activity.
2 Methodology and Related Work
In information retrieval, a classic way to find related
documents is to measure the cosine similarity be-
tween the documents in a vector model (Baeza-
Yates and Ribeiro-Neto, 1999). Using cosine simi-
larity to identify archival bond has specific limita-
tions. Cosine similarity measure does not account
for differences in length between documents, nor for
documents that while related to the same activity
are loosely similar. Instead, it will score high docu-
ments that share same words but are not part of a
story. In general, these variations are present in
archival collections.
We propose to compute the similarity between
two documents locally instead of globally, a concept
drawn from local alignment methodology in bio-
informatics (Gusfield, 1997). While biological se-
quences evolve throughout time owing to constant
mutation events, the parts of the sequences that
directly participate in cellular activities remain rela-
tively stable. Therefore, the global similarity between
two sequences is often less important than the local
similarity, which is defined by the highest similarity
between any two substrings from two sequences.
Here we adapt a similar approach to model archival
bond as the most similar parts between two
documents.
Figure 1 shows the methodology workflow. Each
document in a set is broken into one or more
ordered segments based on the number of para-
graphs in the document. If the length of a segment
(including spaces) is less than a predefined min-
imum number of characters threshold (MNCT),
the segment is merged with the next one. We then
remove stop-words and transform each segment
into a vector to compute the similarity between
every pair of segments. For a pair of documents,
we derive a score based on the maximum similarity
score found between their segments.
Rather than measuring inter-paragraph similarity
within one document to identify subtopic structure
as done by Hearst (1994), we compare document
segments to identify related topics across a collec-
tion. Hence the goal of segmentation is to minimize
the variation of length between the documents.
Barzilay and Elhadad (2003) use a dynamic pro-
gramming algorithm to align sentences and find
documents that present similar information. Since
we aim to find documents that convey different in-
formation about a target activity, we require less
Fig. 1 Workflow to compute document similarity with PA
W. Xu and M. Esteva
360 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
precision to identify similarity. Hence, our method
is designed to identify related documents using the
vector space model for words within paragraphs.
Moreover, in contrast to PA, sentence alignment
demands more computation. Currently, many re-
search efforts are directed towards detecting dupli-
cate and near duplicate webpages (Fetterly et al.,
2005; Henzinger, 2006). While PA recovers different
versions of documents with high similarity, our
interest is to find documents that, while related,
may not have a high similarity score.
3 Implementation and Evaluation
3.1 Case study collection
We tested our method in a case study digital archive
belonging to a philanthropic organization. Over fif-
teen years, the employees deposited their drafts and
final documents in directories under their name on
a shared server following their own record-keeping
criteria. Observing the collection we noted that for
periods at a time, duplicate or near duplicate para-
graphs about an activity are present across long
documents (annual reports, call for grants, plans,
and board meeting minutes), while short docu-
ments about the activity (letters, memos, project
summaries, and press releases) share some or
many of the same terms. Short documents contain
between 400 and 600 words and long ones 4,000
words or more. In turn, many long and short docu-
ments share the same terms, names, and places but
in relation to different activities, and documents
that have common business phrases are not about
the same activity (Esteva, 2007). The collection re-
flects the employee’s records creation practices, af-
forded by the cut and paste function of the word
processor, the possibility to co-write documents,
and the use of a common organizational language.
3.2 Test of the paragraph alignment
method
The digital archive spans from 1996 to 2005 and
contains a total of 16,404 documents and seventeen
authors. Documents per year range from 500 to
3,000. We tested the method in all 714 documents
from the year 1997 with eight authors and
document types that are common to the entire arch-
ive. To sort the documents by author and by last
modified date we used file management software.
Documents were segmented using MNCT of
1,000, 750, and 500 characters. Year, author, and
segment number were preserved in the documents’
filename.
The test was based on assessing seven test groups.
We selected five query documents, each correspond-
ing to a target activity (test groups 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6),
and two containing summaries of different activities
(test groups 3 and 7). This selection aimed to return
one story per each of the five test groups, and
different stories for test groups 3 and 7. For each
query document, we also identified a number of
related documents as control groups, although
other related documents could exist in the set.
For each test group, both the cosine similarity
and the PA methods returned a list of documents
ranked from more to less similar. For evaluation
purposes and to determine the noise in the trail,
we checked the results against the control groups,
labeling the ranked document as a ‘true positive’ if it
was related to the query document; otherwise the
document was labeled as a ‘false positive’.
3.3 Results evaluation
We compared the results of the different MNCT
with those obtained by calculating cosine similarity
as a measure of global similarity between the docu-
ments. Table 1 shows that the PA method with a
MNCT of 750 characters returned the best results
five out of seven times (test groups 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6).
For test group 7, the best results were obtained with
a MNCT of 500 characters. In this case, the query
document contained multi-paragraph summaries of
five different activities, which are also mentioned in
other documents in the set. The PA method did not
work for test group 3, which contains a long list of
short sentences about different activities. The dis-
tinctive terms in these sentences correspond to
proper names, which are not present in other docu-
ments in the set. In turn, the terms describing the
activities are common across the recovered false
positives.
Figure 2 shows a plot of the results of test group
1 in which the PA method with a MNCT of 750
Finding stories in the archive through paragraph alignment
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 361
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
characters performed the best. The test group tells
the story of a program to train young orchestra dir-
ectors. The query document is a memo with a brief
description of the project and estimated costs for
lodging and travel for the participants. Returned
true positives of five authors include: other planning
documentation, correspondence with stakeholders,
the call for grants, a press release, a list of partici-
pants, the musical program, and annual and reports
in which the program is described among other pro-
grams in the organization. Since results are ranked
by similarity, the chronological sequence of the
story is found in the documents content.
For the results of the PA with 750 MNCT, before
the last true positive is found, the graphic shows a
peak with a sequence of false positives. After reading
the documents we found that they are unrelated to
the target activity but that some of its paragraphs
share common terms with the query documents.
This sequence is more pronounced for the cosine
similarity results.
The results suggest that although related docu-
ments may not share similar global word distribu-
tions, they share similar word distributions in some
of their segments. While the efficiency of the differ-
ent MNCT depends on the particular word distri-
bution of the documents that are being compared,
in general, with a smaller MNCT, the PA method is
more effective to retrieve related documents with
less global similarity. However, if the MNCT is
very small, the number of matching words shared
by two paragraphs may decrease. Therefore, the
method may return more false positives.
4 Conclusions
This research has implications for the long-term re-
tention and access of chaotic archives. Using the
concept of archival bond as a theoretical framework,
we developed a method to find stories and make
sense of a ROT archive that may be otherwise dis-
carded. Results show that local similarity matters
to identify documents that relate to the same story
even though they may be different in size and
convey somewhat different information. While PA
still retrieves false positives, it is an improvement
over the cosine similarity measure. Currently, to
better identify the adequate MNCT, we are con-
sidering the distribution of number of characters
in the collection. Research conducted in archives
normally implies reviewing extensive holdings in
an attempt to exhaust the possibilities of finding
Table 1 Results comparison of the PA and the cosine similarity methods
Test group 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
No. of characters (with space) 1,170 2,425 7,530 1,390 2,654 1,176 1,1356
No of true positives 21 5 9 17 19 19 43
No. of false positives
Cosine 28 36 6 205 88 53 103
PA 500 10 49 10 20 87 46 47
PA 750 6 27 12 6 16 38 91
PA 1000 7 186 11 17 100 117 71
Best results are shown in bold.
Fig. 2 Comparison of PA method and cosine similarity
for test-group one
W. Xu and M. Esteva
362 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
evidence. PA allows archivists to find not just indi-
vidual documents but a story. By recovering the
documents that tell a story in relation to time and
provenance, the archival bond between documents,
and therefore the collection’s structure, starts to
show. Stories may then become points of access
that embed contextual information.
Funding
This work was supported by a National Archives
and Records Administration (NARA) supplement
to the National Science Foundation (NSF)
Cooperative Agreement (OCI-0504077).