Social network visualization from
TEI data
............................................................................................................................................................
Marcus Bingenheimer, Jen-Jou Hung and Simon Wiles
Library and Information Center, Dharma Drum Buddhist College,
Taiwan, R.O.C.
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
The focus of this article is a system for visualizing social network data derived
from a TEI-encoded corpus of texts. It describes the collection of biographies
of historical Chinese Buddhist monks, which constitutes this corpus and the
TEI markup, in particular the innovative concept of a ‘nexus-point’ that was
originally applied to them with the goal of producing GIS-like visualizations [see
Bingenheimer, M., Hung, J.-J., and Wiles, S. (2009). Markup meets GIS -
Visualizing the ‘Biographies of Eminent Buddhist Monks’. In Banissi, E. et al.
(eds), Proceedings of Information Visualization IV 2009. IEEE Computer Society:
550–4.]. Over the course of this work, it became clear that a data set of
nexus-points could be derived from this markup which would support a repre-
sentation of the social network which can be inferred from the corpus. The
nature of this social network is explored and some interesting preliminary
applications are suggested. The software architecture which supports the visual-
ization, based on the PREFUSE toolkit, is introduced. Finally, the scope for the
future development of the corpus and the system are discussed, and some
avenues for potentially fruitful analysis are suggested. Throughout the article,
it is argued that the methods and techniques employed here are applicable
well beyond the present context. In describing this project of social network
visualization, it is demonstrated that a well-marked-up TEI corpus can, with
very little additional technical overhead and using the same markup, serve as
the basis for multiple representations of the same data.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
One of the main advantages of well-marked-up
texts, and the data sets which can be derived from
them, is that their application is never limited to any
single research question or mode of visualization.
Although most projects deploy markup with par-
ticular analytic or display purposes in mind, it is
often the case that the understanding encoded
into the text in this way can be used in the service
of multiple ends, and often in unexpected and
serendipitous ways. This article introduces a way
of visualizing social networks extracted from a
TEI-encoded corpus whose markup conventions
were originally intended to support spacio-temporal
analysis (Bingenheimer et al., 2009). After the
markup was added, it became apparent that the
data now available also describes and constitutes
a social network and could be visualized as such,
thereby giving rise to completely new views and
perspectives on the information contained in the
texts. The results are of substantial interest and
have potentially great significance for research into
Chinese Buddhist history. An online interface giving
Correspondence:
Marcus Bingenheimer,
Dharma Drum Buddhist
College, No. 2-6 Xishihu,
Jinshan 20842, Taipei
County, Taiwan, ROC.
E-mail:
m.bingenheimer@gmail.com
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
271
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr020 Advance Access published on 22 May 2011
access to visualizations of the social networks
contained in the marked-up corpus, built using
open-source software, has been made available to
scholars and the general public. We aim to show
how social network visualizations can be achieved
from high-end digital editions with comparatively
little overhead.
2 Data set
Between 2007 and 2010, Dharma Drum Buddhist
College conducted a markup project with the aim
of creating advanced digital editions of four import-
ant collections of biographies of Buddhist monks
(the Liang- -, Tang- -, Song- -, and Ming-
- Gaoseng Zhuan ). More than 1,300 bio-
graphies were marked up and each place name,
person name, and date was connected to an author-
ity database. The corpus contains information on
more than 5,900 persons and more than 3,500
places.
2.1 Nexus-points
In addition to identifying and disambiguating these
entities, geo-referencing the places, and providing
basic information on the people, another layer of
markup was added to record semantically simple
events that joins these data. We call this markup
construct a ‘nexus-point’ because it represents in-
formation in the text which connects people, places,
and time. Nexus-points in the data set described
here can be expressed in natural language in the
form:
One or more persons were at a certain place at
a certain time.
In the markup, this was realized using link
groups connecting persons, places and dates that
are mentioned in a biography. A reference to the
exact location of the nexus-point in the text (a
TARGET attribute on <link> elements) allows
easy look-up in case of longer biographies (see
Figure 1).
Nexus-points can of course be expressed in for-
mats other than TEI (such as RDF, OWL, etc.) but
they were originally conceived by us in the context
of a markup project that was to serve as the basis for
a spacio-temporal exploration of Chinese Buddhist
history. The main characteristic of nexus-points is
that they are syntactic, not semantic—i.e. nexus-
points make no statement as regards exactly what
happened with these person(s) at a certain time at a
certain place, but only that the text contains infor-
mation that something happened. This is a great
advantage. Firstly, because it does away with the
need to devise an ontology of events. Secondly, it
does not preclude future extension of the data.
Should researchers later want to add categories for
these events, they can do so by building on the in-
dispensable foundation of clearly identified objects
(persons, places, dates, etc.).
For this data set, the date given for events is only
rarely a particular day or month, but often points to
a time period. In some cases, especially when short
biographies do not contain an explicit place-date-
person nexus, we use the life dates of a person as the
date reference. Such a nexus-point is equivalent to
saying that the person was at a certain place at some
point in his or her life. This is still useful for a
geospacial visualization that shows activity, or the
absence of activity, in certain locations in China
at different periods. For our social-network visual-
ization, the lack of precision for certain events does
not impact their usefulness. Our aim is to show
‘who knew whom’ in a certain period of Chinese
Buddhism. Where the texts give precise dates, they
are reflected in the markup; where the texts are im-
precise, we record the range of possible values, the
reign period of an emperor, or the life dates of a
person.
For the visualization of social networks, we can
use only those nexus-points that connect more than
one person, thus yielding at minimum dyads of two
Fig. 1 Nexus-point attached to a biography: several per-
sons at a certain place at a certain time
M. Bingenheimer et al.
272 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
actors which are not further connected to others.
As of August 2010, the corpus contains 5,565
nexus-points that are used for the visualization of
geospacial and temporal patterns, and a subset of
2,126 of these connect more than one person,
making statements of the form:
Two or more persons were at a certain place at
a certain time.
The data set of these 2,126 events is the basis for
our first attempt at visualizing social networks.
3 Social Network
Historical social network analysis has been used
sporadically for decades.1 Our own approach differs
from previous attempts to use social network tools
with historical data in that it is essentially text based
and not centered on a particular research question.
Furthermore, while traditionally social network
visualization is more often a result of an analytical
procedure, the aim here is to show that social net-
works can be ‘visualized’ from marked-up texts
almost as a by-product: the information extracted
is valid but not biased toward any particular use,
because only very basic parameters—personal iden-
tity, place, and time—are encoded. Our focus is on
producing useful visualizations of high-end digital
editions of classical Buddhist texts. As such they are
the beginning of further inquiry rather than the
result of historical analysis.
The biographies of eminent monks are usually
short, mostly comprising only a few paragraphs in
English. They are generally told chronologically fol-
lowing the career of an eminent monk from his
childhood, to where he received his education.
After that, important events or even just a single
story are mentioned (‘was summoned by the em-
peror,’ ‘translated sutra X together with the Indian
master Y,’ ‘went to place Z and taught Vinaya there’,
etc.), again in chronological order, and the biog-
raphy closes with the time and circumstances of
the subject’s death (where known). Buddhist biogra-
phies in East Asia follow the genre established by
Chinese historiography in the second century BCE
which, in marked contrast to the Indian model, tries
to give time and place information wherever pos-
sible. It is in the nature of these texts that wherever
two or more persons are mentioned as being in the
same place at the same time, these people
almost certainly knew each other. Actors which
are not somehow interacting with either each
other or the main subject are simply not part of
the narrative.
As mentioned above, nexus-points do not con-
tain information as to the nature of the event: they
are devoid of semantic content. To include informa-
tion about what happened would require an ontol-
ogy of events, the development and deployment of
which would have slowed down the markup process
considerably. Moreover, the aim of this project was
to provide a general purpose corpus for an advanced
representation of biographical literature, and an
ontology would almost necessarily be biased
toward a particular research agenda: ‘The choice
of relational content, also called type of tie, is largely
determined by a project’s theoretical concerns and
research objectives’ (Knoke and Yang, 2008).
However, the corpus was designed to be extensible,
and should a particular ontology of events be
needed one day, it can now be easily added by ex-
tending the link groups that connect two or more
actors.
At the present time, nexus-points express only
the most basic social connection between actors:
that they communicated with each other in some
way.2
As of August 2010, the largest simple visualiza-
tion that we can draw from our data set contains
2,467 actors connected by 4,711 ties. Average con-
nections per actor are 2.26 and actual number of
connections range from one to eight. The density
of the network is 0.0008.
Figure 2 shows the largest possible social network
derived from our data (using PREFUSE; see below).
The periphery shows a belt of small networks, with a
number of unconnected dyads at the outer fringe.
These are actors that are only mentioned in connec-
tion with one other actor, who in turn has no other
ties. In the center, there is a large cluster where all
actors are connected with each other via walks of
varying length. Subgroups and cliques (groups
where all actors know each other) are already
Social network visualization from TEI data
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 273
recognizable and become increasingly evident on
closer inspection.
The simplicity of the nexus-point events means
that all graphs drawn from this data set are undir-
ected. Ties between actors could be weighed by
counting the number of nexus-points that establish
this particular connection. Stronger ties point to
more information about interaction between indi-
viduals. Another way to valuate ties would be to
analyze the network according to the categories in
which the biographies are grouped in GSZ literature
(translators, exegetes, Vinaya masters, thauma-
turges, etc.). Though these would be only applicable
for monks, it would still be interesting to see if
different categories evince different network
structures.
4 Use of Social Network
Visualization
Our short-term aim is to produce an online inter-
face to visualize the communication network of
Chinese Buddhist history, as it can be learned
from the sources, as a research tool for scholars.
Already in the trial version, the tool answers the
question ‘Who knew whom (according to our data
set)?,’ a type of information that was not available
previously through dictionaries or indices. Users
can easily identify cliques (groups of actors who
know each other), prominent actors (indicated by
larger labels), and multiple ties between individuals
(indicated by thicker lines).
Fig. 2 Visualization of the largest data set: all actors, all ties
M. Bingenheimer et al.
274 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
In the example shown in Fig. 3, the monk
Tanyong (fl. late fourth century CE) connects
the sub-systems of three key figures in the history of
Chinese Buddhism. In the current data set, the
famous translators Daoan , Huiyuan
and Kuma¯rajı¯va and their respective cliques are con-
nected by only one single person: Tanyong.
Tanyong is decidedly not a famous person and
hardly appears in any modern study of Buddhist
history, though his role in the communication
flow of the Buddhist elite of those days certainly
deserves mention.
We are not yet at the stage where we can confi-
dently use the data set for sophisticated social net-
work analysis, but simple analytic procedures which
identify actors that connect cliques or groups or
actors with a high degree of centrality are well
within our reach.
5 Visualization Interface
Architecture
Our interface is currently built on PREFUSE (http://
prefuse.org/), a Java-based visualization toolkit
which yielded good results within a short develop-
ment time, and runs as an applet in a user’s browser.
The strengths of PREFUSE are its high quality
built-in data visualization models and its powerful
functions for user interaction. These features are
packaged in simple and easy-to-use components
that allow the construction of a professional visual-
ization system with minimal effort. The logical
structure of the PREFUSE library is organized accord-
ing to the Information Visualization Reference
Model (Chi et al., 1999), a well-known information
visualization framework, which ensures that PREFUSE
is easy to integrate and work with. PREFUSE is an
open-source software, meaning that the option is
always available to modify its internal functionality
if necessary. Comprehensive documentation for
PREFUSE is available, which is not always the case
with open-source tools.
PREFUSE has many different visualization models,
which it refers to as ‘layouts’, including
‘AxisLayout’, ‘CircleLayout’, ‘GridLayout’, and
TreeLayout. Each layout has unique features and
therefore is suitable for different visualization scen-
arios. Our visualization system is based on
‘ForceDirectedLayout’, a specialized graph-like
layout in which the visualization basically
Fig. 3 One actor serving as a bridge between different subgroups
Social network visualization from TEI data
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 275
consists of a set of nodes and edges binding
related nodes. In contrast to a standard graph
layout, ‘ForceDirectedLayout’ adds repellent force
between nodes, and makes edges act as springs.
This modification tightens the bonds between
nodes in the same cluster and increases the distance
between clusters, such that the boundaries between
node clusters in the social network are more
prominent. In addition, we also overwrite the
default ‘ColorAction’ class to highlight nodes
that are directly connected to the currently active
node.
The interface provides query filters for persons,
time and biographical collection. By applying
queries such as ‘Show me information on social
networks for the time between 450 and 500 CE’,
the current interface allows for visualization of par-
tial networks.
The interface is connected to our authority data-
bases and clicking on a person label yields basic
biographical information on the actor (see Fig. 3).
Clicking on a tie, one gets information on the
one or more nexus-points that contain the infor-
mation on which the tie is based (see Fig. 4).
From there, links back to the biographies allow
users to verify the nexus-point event in the original
texts.
6 Future Development
The nexus-point concept has proved a useful vehicle
for representing textual information, and we have
managed to produce tools for GIS and social net-
work visualizations. Its application is obviously not
limited to Buddhist Studies but can be used wher-
ever one deals with complex, linguistically difficult
sources. Through the identification of persons,
places, and dates and the joining of these three
data to create nexus-points, a significant amount
of information is made available for computation.
Both the tools and the data set have begun to be
used by scholars in Buddhist studies as well as other
fields.3
In the near future, we will encode further infor-
mation by defining new types of nexus-points,
relaxing the stringent requirement for the presence
of location and date elements in a nexus-point. Type
II nexus-points can omit a location reference. Type
II events can not be used for GIS-like visualizations,
but contribute to the data set available for visualiza-
tion of social networks. We are also in the process of
adding more biographical collections to our corpus
of texts.4
The online visualization tool, useful as it is to
understand the social connections of a monk
Fig. 4 More nexus-point information results in thicker ties, links connect to the corpus
M. Bingenheimer et al.
276 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
according to the current data set, is only a first step
toward further analysis on the level of the whole
network. As Wetherell (1999) remarks ‘Because his-
torians are plagued by an incomplete historical
record and imperfect understandings of past social
relations, HSNA [Historical Social Network
Analysis] remains an inherently problematic enter-
prise. Yet despite conceptual, methodological and
evidentiary obstacles, SNA possesses real potential
for historical analysis.’ In our case, two directions
of analysis are especially promising in terms of yield-
ing new insights into Buddhist history. First, an ana-
lysis of various types of centrality is likely to identify
the central players in the network described by our
data. All three main types of centrality (Wasserman
and Faust, 1994)—degree, closeness, and between-
ness—have the potential to contribute to our under-
standing of Buddhist history. Second, algorithmic
analysis of cliques appears promising, because it
allows us to identify groups of actors who knew
each other. Working on any one single actor X in
history, it is useful to know if the people he or she
interacted with also knew each other.
Funding
This work was supported by the Haoran Foundation
.