Introduction
In addition to drawing upon content experts, librar-
ians, archivists, developers, programmers, man-
agers, and others, many emerging digital projects1
pull in disciplinary expertise from areas that do not
typically work in team environments. To be effect-
ive, these teams must find balance between different
discipline-specific approaches and modes of inter-
action to negotiate processes—some of which may
Correspondence:
Lynne Siemens, School of
Public Administration,
University of Victoria,
Victoria, Canada.
Email:
siemensl@uvic.ca
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
335
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr028 Advance Access published on 30 May 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
be counter to ‘natural’ individually oriented work
habits—which support the larger goals and
group-oriented work of these digital projects.
However, to accomplish this, team members must
understand the similarities and differences between
their own and their discipline’s work habits and
those of their team members.
This article will contribute to the development of
these necessary discussions and expanded under-
standings by exploring the similarities and differ-
ences in approaches between members of the
Digital Libraries (DL) and Digital Humanities
(DH) communities, two groups that often collabor-
ate on digital projects. This knowledge will enable
those who work in such teams to recognise factors
that tend to predispose them to success, and per-
haps more importantly, to avoid those that may lead
to problematic interactions, and thus make a project
less successful than it might otherwise have been.
This article is structured as follows: (1) the con-
text will be outlined for collaboration in the DH and
DL communities along with the benefits and chal-
lenges of team-oriented research; (2) the results
from surveys and interviews with community mem-
bers will be explored with the objective of outlining
the similarities and differences in collaborative
approaches; (3) the article will conclude with impli-
cations for practice.
2 Context
Traditionally, research contributions in humanities
broadly defined have been felt to be and docu-
mented to be predominantly solo efforts by academ-
ics involving little direct collaboration with others,
a model reinforced through doctoral studies and
beyond (Newell et al., 2000; Cuneo, 2003).
However, this trend has been changing with a grow-
ing realization that the research questions addressed
by academics are becoming more complex and
technologically sophisticated, often beyond the cap-
acity of any one individual, thus requiring a team
approach (Newell et al., 2000; Hara et al., 2003). The
DL and DH communities are at the forefront of this
shift. Given that the nature of digital projects in-
volves computers and a variety of skills and
expertise, collaborations in these fields involve indi-
viduals within their institutions and with others na-
tionally and internationally. Such collaboration
typically must coordinate efforts between academ-
ics, undergraduate and graduate students, research
assistants, computer programmers and developers,
librarians, and other individuals as well as financial
and other resources. In addition, as potentially nat-
ural partners, collaborations between academics and
librarians are likely to become common as issues of
long term digital project sustainability are explored,
issues that librarians and other information special-
ists are best able to address (Unsworth, 2007;
Kretzschmar Jr. et al., 2009; Cunningham, 2010).
As further examples of the importance of the col-
laboration between the humanities and libraries, the
Institute of Museum and Library Services contrib-
uted grant funding to the Digital Humanities
Start-Up Grant, sponsored by the National
Endowment for the Humanities (National
Endowment for the Humanities Office of Digital
Humanities, 2010).
Especially when involving a variety of disciplines,
collaboration can enhance research by increasing its
quality, depth, and scope and often can achieve
what a single individual could not. However, these
gains require additional work on the part of the
team members and new skills such as conflict reso-
lution, negotiation, and communication (Kraut
et al., 1987–1988; Northcraft et al., 1993; Newell
et al., 2000). Further, several challenges exist
within these research teams. Difficulties and con-
flicts between various professional subcultures due
to their differing academic languages and research
methodology may exist (Epton et al., 1983; Pearson,
1983; Northcraft et al., 1993). These tensions can be
exacerbated when team members also have different
approaches to collaboration (Birnbaum, 1979;
Fennel et al., 1983; Hara et al., 2003; Cunningham,
2010). Without clear communication, coordination,
and integration, problems due to differing expect-
ations of roles, contributions, power, personalities,
and status can occur (Cheng, 1979; Northcraft et al.,
1993; Martin, 1997). Contextual factors, such as in-
stitutional reward and recognition policies, and
relative levels of prestige of the different academic
institutions involved, can also minimize the
L. Siemens et al.
336 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
effectiveness of the research team (Nason et al.,
1998; Amabile et al., 2001; Cech et al., 2004).
Ultimately, when teams are not successful, the
result can be uncompleted research, disrupted per-
sonal relationships, and loss of reputation and re-
search money (Newell et al., 2000).
Given this context, some research has been done
on DL and DH project teams as separate entities
(For example, see Johnson, 2009; Liu et al., 2005;
Liu et al., 2007; Ruecker et al., 2007; Siemens, 2009).
However, little has been done on the nature of the
interaction between these two communities when in
collaboration. On top of disciplinary differences,
these work relationships can be further complicated
when some team members, such as librarians, have
more experience and training in collaboration than
others. These can also be made more difficult when
faculty do not have a good understanding or appre-
ciate for the librarian’s role in supporting research
and scholarship (Christiansen et al., 2004;
Cummings et al., 2005). Ultimately, too little is
known about how teams involving DL and DH
members collaborate, and the types of support
needed to ensure project success. This article is a
start to that discussion.
3 Methods
This research project used a two-pronged inductive
approach with a combination of data collection
methods in order to explore the nature of collabor-
ation between these communities (Bickel et al.,
1995; Jassawalla et al., 1998; Easterby-Smith et al.,
1999; Amabile et al., 2001). First, members of vari-
ous DH and DL research teams located in Canada,
the USA, and the UK were interviewed in 2008 and
2009. Lasting about an hour, these in-depth inter-
views explored the individual’s research team con-
text with a focus on their definition of teams, their
experiences working in them, and the types of sup-
ports and research preparation required to ensure
effective research results. Purposeful sampling was
used to select those individuals with specific experi-
ences and knowledge related to the research
question. Participants were identified through per-
sonal contacts and recommendations from others
(Rubin et al., 1995; Marshall et al., 1999).
Interview questions can be found in the
Supplementary Data.
Second, drawing upon themes from these inter-
views, a survey was administered twice—first to
members of the DH community and second to the
DL one, with slight revisions to the survey to reflect
the specific DL context. This allowed for the com-
parison of the results between the two communities
to determine if there were any similarities and/or
differences in methods of collaboration. These sur-
veys were sent to the members of these communities
through listserves and association membership lists
in North America and Europe. In particular, the
survey for the DH community was distributed to
members of the Society for Digital Humanities/
Socie´te´ pour l’e´tude des me´dias interactifs,
Association for Literary and Linguistic Computing,
Association for Computing and the Humanities,
and the Centrenet, HUMANIST listserves and
others. The DL community survey was distributed
to members of the Canadian Library Association,
Canadian Archival listserve, HUMANIST (with a
specific call for librarians and archivists), and
other similar outlets. The survey produced descrip-
tive statistics on the number of teams, their com-
position, and perceived effectiveness; it also
established a baseline against which further research
in this field and others can be compared. It should
be noted that the resulting sample is small and
self-selected and there are limitations to generaliz-
ability across both communities. The surveys can be
found in the supplementary data, available in LLC
online.
The results from both the surveys and interviews
provided a description of these communities’ work
patterns and relationships, and the identification of
supports and research preparation required to sus-
tain these teams (McCracken, 1988; Marshall et al.,
1999).
4 Findings
The following section will present the findings from
both surveys and interviews by exploring similarities
and differences in collaborative approaches. The two
Implications of the similarities and differences in collaborative approaches
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 337
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
communities show many common patterns of inter-
action, but the results also suggest the presence of
several key differences which may have an impact on
a digital project team’s efforts. Survey and interview
respondent demographics will be outlined.
4.1 Survey respondent demographics
In total, seventy-one individual respondents who
had experience with at least one digital project com-
pleted the survey with the number of respondents
split almost evenly between the two communities.
These individuals have been involved in a variety of
digital projects, including digitized manuscripts,
electronic editions, databases, software creation, in-
stitutional repositories, portals, and others. The
project teams in which these survey respondents
have participated are often inter-departmental and
often span institutions, but less often crossed na-
tional borders. The teams also tend to be either
fairly small in the number of members with three
to five members or relatively larger with more than
ten individuals involved. The project budgets were
varied in size with some having budgets of less than
$50,000 (CDN) and others having significantly
larger budgets totalling more than $250,000
(CDN); these larger budget projects tended to be
within the DH rather than the DL community.
Respondents played various roles in these teams,
ranging from project lead to team members, tech-
nical support providers, librarians, or project man-
agers. In some cases, individuals held more than one
position or used titles that captured the more subtle
roles that they played. Table 1 summarizes survey
respondent demographics.2
4.2 Interview respondent demographics
The twelve interviewed individuals (seven from the
DH community and five from the DL community3)
have participated in a range of digital projects, in
terms of project objectives, team membership,
budget, and geographical dispersion, within their
own institution as well as nationally and interna-
tionally. The roles they have played vary and include
research assistant, researcher, computer program-
mer and developer, project manager, and lead
investigator.
4.3 Similarities
The results from Question 2 in the survey begin to
establish the foundation for the examination of the
similarities and differences between these two com-
munities, from which the survey and interview re-
sults will be explored to provide a fuller picture of
these collaborative approaches.
As can be seen in Table 2 which focuses on the
results to survey Question 2, teams are used for
digital projects because the scale and scope of
these projects demand this approach. Respondents
ranked the fact that they worked in teams because
team members have different skill sets highest (DL:
93%, DH: 90%). Further, 72% of the DL respond-
ents and 51% of the DH respondents said that they
work in teams because the project schedule requires
multiple staff to complete tasks on time.
Interestingly, both sets of respondents ranked very
low (9%) the need for a team due to the fact that the
data is in different languages.
Respondents further elaborated on the reasons
for team work through the open-ended questions
on the benefits and necessity of project teams.
These reasons focused on both the requirements
of the work and on the resulting inter-personal
team relationships. Respondents in both commu-
nities focused on the ability of a team to leverage
expertise and complementary skills, especially
within multi-disciplinary teams. As one respondent
remarked, ‘some work can ONLY be done collab-
oratively’ (DHR34;4 emphasis in the original).
Further, another commented that one can learn ‘a
lot from others with different skill sets and experi-
ences’ and that these teams can also provide ‘sup-
port, particularly through the setbacks’ (DLR16).
Analysis of the full survey results provide further
insight into the methods of interaction and collab-
oration within these digital project teams. Both
communities indicated that they relied on email
and face-to-face meetings for most of their commu-
nication with relatively little use of online commu-
nication tools. The DL respondents seem to suggest
a greater reliance on email as opposed to
face-to-face communications and tended to rate
the relative effectiveness of email higher than DH
respondents. Potential reasons for this difference
will be discussed below.
L. Siemens et al.
338 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
The respondents also indicated that their digital
project teams tended to operate without formal
documentation that outlined organizational struc-
ture, roles, responsibilities, decision making meth-
ods, and conflict resolution mechanisms. Only
approximately one-third of digital project teams
within either community had such documents.
Further, survey respondents were asked to evaluate
the importance of various decision-making mech-
anisms to their particular research team. For both
communities, over three-quarters ranked decision-
making by the project leader as important or very
important to the team as compared to consensus
or decision-making by a few select individuals.
These results might reflect the large number of
self-identified team leaders in the survey samples.
At the same time, groups may be using different
kinds of decision-making processes depending on
the type of decision, as one respondent elaborated:
The group tends to function using a number
of methods from consensus to individual de-
cision making. This is made possible by (1)
agreed upon goals and objectives, (2) a recog-
nition that each of us has strengths and weak-
nesses, and (3) a division of responsibilities
wherein those carrying out duties are given
latitude to perform them. The respect we
Table 1 Survey respondent demographics
Demographic (number) Digital humanities (36) Digital libraries (35)
Affiliation University (32)
Research centre (1)
Other (3)
University (23)
Research centre (3)
Public library (2)
Archive (1)
Other (6)
Language English (28)
French (4)
Spanish (1)
Other (1)
English (31)
Other (2)
Role within the team Leader (22)
Team member (6)
Technical support (1)
Other (4)
Leader (15)
Team member (4)
Technical support (1)
Librarian (6)
Other (7)
Team’s membership size Two individuals (1)
Three to five individuals (15)
Six to ten individuals (6)
More than ten individuals (11)
Two individuals (1)
Three to five individuals (19)
Six to ten individuals (6)
More than ten individuals (7)
Budget $0–9,999 CDN (6)
$10,000–49,999 CDN (5)
$50,000–249,999 CDN (9)
$250,000 CDN and more (12)
$0–9,999 CDN (11)
$10,000–49,999 CDN (7)
$50,000–249,999 CDN (9)
$250,000 CDN and more (4)
Position Academic (10)
Post Doctoral Fellow (2)
Programmer/Developer (4)
Researcher (2)
Student (4)
Academic (8)
Librarian/Archivist (23)
Programmer/Developer (1)
Project Manager (2)
Other (3)
Academic discipline Humanities (19)
Social Sciences (5)
Library and Information Sciences (4)
Computer Science (6)
Library and Information Sciences (9)
Archival Studies (22)
Humanities (24)
Social Sciences (2)
Other (1)
Respondents indicated more than one academic discipline.
Implications of the similarities and differences in collaborative approaches
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 339
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
have for one another’s talents means that is
generally easy to advance broad agendas for
the project by consensus and make decisions
about more specific issues based upon discus-
sion and listening to those who know most
about an issue and communicate to the
group as a whole. . . (DLR44).
The opposite situation is true for formal project
plan and project management documents that out-
lined project goals, outcomes, and timelines. In this
case, over 60% of respondents in both communities
indicated that their team had such a document. Of
this subset, the majority agreed or strongly agreed
that processes and steps required to meet the project
goals were well understood. In addition, over 80%
agreed or strongly agreed that the project goals
themselves were well understood. Finally, over
60% agreed or strongly agreed that the mechanism
for setting and sharing the project goals were
effective.
DL and DH survey respondents reported similar
challenges within their collaborations, many of
which are similar to those encountered by many
teams, regardless of project focus. These included
difficulties associated with scheduling and coordi-
nating tasks, people, and other resources, facilitating
communication with geographically dispersed team
members, even those within the same organization,
and interpersonal issues, such as conflict resolution
and different work rhythms. For many, group dy-
namics and expectation management were factors.
As one respondent stated, ‘every now and then one
person just doesn’t work well with others and one
ineffective and unproductive or stubborn person
can drag the team down’ (DLR17). Several also
highlighted the importance of ‘making clear what
the expectations are for each member’ (DHR9) as
well as ‘finding common goals’ (DHR22). Key activ-
ities for many teams included ‘reaching agreement,
building on project outcomes, taking ownership of
aspects of the project’ (DLR36). One respondent
perhaps addressed this issue most succinctly with a
comment regarding the necessity of ‘getting every-
one on the same page and having a vision for the
end result’ (DLR33).
For some digital project teams, language differ-
ences presented barriers on several levels. First,
given the geographical spread of some teams ‘lan-
guage barriers—many team members had English as
a second language—made communication some-
what challenging’ (DLR9). The geographical
spread often slowed group progress. This particular
challenge was highlighted by one DL respondent
with regard to their particular project. They stated
there were ‘unique challenges for a long-distance
collaboration on digitization. Pre-digitization and
digital imaging are carried out in one country
with all the physical materials located there; while
post-digitization and quality control are performed
in another country’5 (DLR15).
However, other challenges were more directly
related to the same diversity that creates the benefits
in these types of teams where a variety of skills and
perspectives are required. As highlighted, these
teams must find methods to allow them to harness
these different skill sets and academic perspectives
to ensure that the team can effectively reach their
research objectives. As acknowledged by one survey
respondent, this type of team work ‘challenges
members to think of their work through another
Table 2 Reasons for collaboration
IN2: Why do you work in a project team? DL DH
Different methodological approaches 24% 54%
Team members have different skill sets 93 90
The volume of data to be studied 15 42
The project schedule requires multiple staff to complete it on time 72 51
The data is in a range of different languages 9 9
Data is collected from geographically distributed areas or participants 63 21
Collaboration is more productive than individual work 40 63
I enjoy collaboration 18 42
L. Siemens et al.
340 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
kind of specialist’s eyes’ (DHR6). Other associated
challenges include the variety of vocabularies used
by members from different disciplinary back-
grounds and the necessity to train ‘people in discip-
lines and methods that aren’t theirs’ (DHR12). As
one respondent indicated, it was challenging ‘getting
all the team members to use the same language:
one person’s ‘‘book’’ is someone else’s ‘‘volume’’
(DLR13). Finally, tensions may be created when
there may also be a ‘general lack of appreciation
of the value of different contributions’ (DHR8).
By way of summary and conclusion to the survey,
respondents were asked to provide advice to teams
undertaking their first digital project. As several re-
spondents suggested, one should ‘plan as much as
you can before you begin’ (DHR11) and ‘set up a
structure and deadlines with milestones’ (DHR19).
Further, ‘formal documents sound cheesy, but in a
multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-generational,
multi-talented work group (as every work group is)
they are essential for setting a baseline of understand-
ing of what the project is and who is supposed to do
what’ (DLR11). Finally, respondents reinforced the
necessity for follow up and project control. As one
respondent stated, a team must outline work clearly
and ‘have one member of the team whose responsi-
bility it is to keep an eye on whether this is being met
or not’ (DLR33).
The respondents also provided advice on appro-
priate communication patterns, including the
importance of face-to-face interactions. One indi-
vidual recommended that ‘it helps especially in the
early stages to have some formalised communica-
tion opportunities—team meetings or whatever’
(DLR16). Further, respondents advocated ‘enough
F2F (face-to-face) time and opportunities to build
trust and working relationships before relying heav-
ily on electronic methods of interaction and com-
munication’ (DHR34). The survey participants also
suggested that a good attitude was necessary with
comments such as ‘Stay in a good mood. Have fun.
Keep your eye on the prize’ (DLR13) and ‘Start
slowly and build up. Expect snags. Expect some re-
sistance. Get buy-in from the top. Have patience.
Take the time to recognize the successes’ (DLR46).
Finally, respondents also stressed the importance of
good team members, particularly those with
patience and who are ‘open-minded’ (DLR50).
Another survey respondent echoed this by suggest-
ing that one should ‘make sure you’ve got good
people; good people make a good team make
good projects. Everything else is secondary’
(DHR12). Ultimately, one needs to ensure that
they are interested in the project and are ‘engaged
intellectually in order to get the job done’ (DLR48).
4.4 Differences
While there are many similarities in approaches be-
tween DL and DH project teams, some interesting
differences exist and may influence the effectiveness
of a digital project team with membership that
draws from these two communities.
First, as seen in Table 2, the starting assumptions
for these projects may be fundamentally different. In
contrast to the DH respondents, DL project teams
are not being formed due to the necessity for team
members with different methodological approaches
and the volume of data within the project. Only 24
and 15% of DL respondents indicated that teams
were needed due to these factors, respectively. This
is in comparison to the 54 and 42% of the DH re-
spondents on the same factors. This difference may
be attributed to the nature of librarians and archiv-
ists’ functions which has them interacting with rela-
tively more volumes of data and undertaking
different tasks with the data, as compared to aca-
demics. DL projects also appear relatively more
deadline driven. That is to say, a greater percentage
of DL respondents indicated that a team was needed
in order to meet deadlines. Further, the data in DL
digital projects tends to be more geographically dis-
persed as compared to DH projects.
Perhaps, the most striking difference can be seen
in the relative weightings of the productivity of col-
laboration versus individual work and enjoyment
levels. In both cases, DL survey respondents indi-
cated that they enjoyed collaboration less and view it
as relatively less productive than individual work as
compared to the DH respondents. Comprising of
relatively more academics, the DH respondents
may undertake more solitary work, and therefore
collaboration may be seen as a welcomed change
and may be a deliberate choice activity. In contrast,
team work is more the norm for librarians and
Implications of the similarities and differences in collaborative approaches
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 341
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
archivists, and thus they may feel it is an expected
part of their jobs and/or assigned tasks, rather than a
welcomed choice. This view was echoed by several
of the DL survey respondents who said that there
may be a ‘corporate requirement’ (DLR 55) for
teams or a recognition that collections and data
have ‘cross-departmental custodianship’ (DLR14);
thus necessitating a team approach. However, in
the open-ended questions, both groups highlighted
the enjoyable aspects of collaboration. As one DL
respondent stated, ‘with the right people, it really
is fun’ (DLR13). Further, ‘delivery of the project is
more rewarding because of the team spirit that de-
velops’ (DHR6).
The differences between these two communities
were clearly articulated in the interviews, with a
focus on academic culture, disciplinary perspectives,
rewards and recognition, and opportunities for
training in team processes. First, the tensions be-
tween disciplines and between research and service
functions that exist in academic culture can lead to
differences in status, whether perceived or actual
(Hagstrom, 1964; Ramsay, 2008; Newell et al.,
2000). For example, librarians are often seen to be
a support and as such may not be perceived as
valued members of a team in the same way academ-
ics are. The DL interviewees were most vocal about
these tensions. DLI1 described academics as ‘prima
donnas’, but recognized that this might be because it
is their individual contributions, accomplishments,
and achievements that are ultimately evaluated.
Further, academics may be more focused on ‘quality
control’ since it is their name that is attached to the
publication (DLI3). Finally, one of the DL inter-
viewees also stressed that ‘we’re very service ori-
ented, but we don’t want that to be confused with
servitude’ (DLI5). One of the DH interviewees
(DHI6) provided further perspective on this by dis-
cussing these tensions within the context of age dif-
ferences, suggesting that younger members of the
academy may be more accepting of the various
roles that team members play and ways that collab-
orative technologies can facilitate this interaction.
As they stated:
. . .because it’s a Humanities-based project,
the idea of working collaboratively isn’t some-
thing, that especially older researchers, are
used to at all. The idea of working in a col-
laborative relationship with your graduate
student is for a senior scholar, that’s crazy,
what are you talking about? That’s just not a
model. Some people say, ‘what you’re de-
veloping is a Sciences-based model’ and no,
actually we’re doing is this experiential based
model that is very much geared toward work-
ing in the Humanities. It’s just different kind
of pedagogy, a different kind of learning, a
different kind of research that we’re engaged
in (DHI8).
They suggested that younger colleagues may have
different comfort and control levels that can allow
for deeper collaboration. All interviewees, regardless
of community, commented on the scholar’s role as
being solitary. Echoing the survey results, the impli-
cation of this is that academics may not be as ac-
customed to working within a team with
deliverables on timelines, when compared to the
often production-oriented work of many librarians.
Another aspect of these differences focused on
the different cultures due to varieties of disciplinary
backgrounds represented in these teams. As noted
above, digital project teams may need to create a
common vocabulary at the start of the project.
One DH interview respondent provided further
elaboration on the translation challenge that can
exist. They said that ‘Humanities scholars do not
know a lot about computer science or technology.
Computer science individuals do not know about
humanities. Information scientists know about
data, but not programming’ (DHI4). The interview
and survey respondents commented on the amount
of time needed to overcome this challenge. As one
of the DL interview respondents said, ‘the reviewer
did an MCRI project based out of University of X,6
one comment that they made to us is that it took
them a year of talking before they got on the same
page’ (DLI1).
Different rewards and recognition policies for
collaborative work exist between these two commu-
nities. As echoed by the survey and interview re-
spondents, collaboration and team work appear to
be key components in librarians’ roles in a way
that is still generally not the case for academics.
For librarians and other information experts,
L. Siemens et al.
342 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
‘active participation and leadership in teams
whether they are local, national, or international is
definitely prized’ (DLI4). However, within
Humanities disciplines in particular, the single
author publication is generally valued higher than
multi-author one (National Endowment for the
Humanities Office of Digital Humanities, 2010).
Training is the last area of difference between the
two communities. The DH interview respondents
indicated that they generally had received very
little formal training in team skills, such as commu-
nication, negotiation, conflict resolution, and
others. Instead, these individuals had learned to
work in teams directly from projects completed as
students or while working in other settings. In com-
parison, the DL interviewees had been more
exposed to training within the context of the diverse
roles that they play within the university and
beyond. As they commented, the Library and
Information Studies curriculum appears to be
more team-oriented and collaborative than trad-
itional humanities programs, a trend that seems to
continue after convocation. In response to this, one
DL interviewee suggested that, regardless of discip-
line, PhD students should be taught about the con-
text of academic life, which includes working
together in teams for both research and teaching
and ‘how to be successful in academic life’ (DLI3).
As can be seen in this research, digital projects
are being undertaken by teams of individuals with a
variety of skills, academic disciplines, and perspec-
tives, partly by choice and partly by necessity given
the type of project demands and organizational set-
ting. Team members from the DH and DL commu-
nities are finding similar benefits and advantages to
this collaborative approach to digital work, despite
challenges. However, it is clear that these two com-
munities approach collaboration from different per-
spectives, which must be understood from the
outset of the digital project in order to reduce asso-
ciated challenges.
5 Discussion
This research contributes to a larger discussion re-
garding the nature of project teams within an
academic setting generally, and within the Digital
Humanities and Digital Libraries communities
more specifically, and supports other studies on aca-
demic project teams, including an earlier study
within the DH community (Siemens, 2009). As con-
firmed within this sample, collaboration enhances
the project work by increasing the quality, depth,
and scope of the scholarly work (Kraut et al.,
1987–1988; Northcraft et al., 1993; Newell et al.,
2000). At the same time, as show above, academic
teams struggle with difficulties and challenges asso-
ciated with the various professional subcultures
(Northcraft et al., 1993; Newell et al., 2000). With
this knowledge, teams can understand those factors
which contribute to success while minimizing and
mitigating the potential difficulties (Amabile et al.,
2001).
Given the survey and interview results, several
conclusions regarding work patterns of these
teams are worth highlighting. Regardless of the
community, these teams appear to be operating
with relatively little formal documentation of
roles, responsibilities, structure, and decision-
making process. The exception is with documents
that outline project goals, outcomes, and timelines,
a difference which may be explained in two ways.
First, many granting programs require a project
plan as part of the application; thus, teams often
start their work with this in place. Second, this situ-
ation may not be surprising given that the majority
of the teams in which the respondents are involved
are relatively small in terms of membership size,
budget, and scale, with relatively little geographical
spread. It may be easier to function with little
formal documentation when a team is small.
However, challenges that may flow from little
formal documentation may become more apparent
when project scope, membership, and budget in-
crease in size and complexity, or when a project
encounters difficulties. For example, several very
large digital projects are underway at present and
are engaged in efforts to be more formal in their
documentation (For example, see Siemens et al.,
2009b). Also, as highlighted above, as projects
become more geographically dispersed, the need
for planning and documentation increases in im-
portance. The open-ended responses in the context
Implications of the similarities and differences in collaborative approaches
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 343
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
of challenges and advice reinforce this need as
survey respondents recommended planning, sche-
duling, and organization as keys to success.
Finally, these respondents reinforced the import-
ance of identifying the right people with whom to
collaborate on these digital projects. This suggests
that while the technical components and content are
important to a digital project, the project’s ultimate
success (or not) may rest on interpersonal factors.
This finding was reinforced in a recent report on the
review of the Start-Up Grant program with the
National Endowment for the Humanities where
project directors indicated that one of their biggest
challenges related to personnel issues with collabor-
ators (National Endowment for the Humanities
Office of Digital Humanities, 2010).
As indicated by the survey results and reinforced
in the interviews, these two communities may start
collaborations with different assumptions which will
impact how they approach the collaboration. For
example, DH survey respondents appear to under-
take collaboration more often because they view it
as more productive and a source of enjoyment as
compared to the DL respondents. Further, their
roles within the teams are very different, perhaps
even a case for envy from the other community.
As the DL survey and interview respondents
stated, academics are perceived to have a relative
luxury in relation to externally imposed deadlines,
unlike aspects of library production-oriented work.
Further, academics often look to other parts of the
university as support for, rather than as collabor-
ators in, the process of scholarship, a situation high-
lighted in other settings (Christiansen et al., 2004).
Finally, collaboration may be a choice activity and a
welcomed change to the typically solitary research
world of an academic. Team work is more the norm
for librarians and archivists, and thus they may feel
it is an expected part of their jobs, rather than a
choice. These different assumptions are further
complicated by the different vocabularies and
areas of expertise, differences that can take time to
negotiate.
The two communities appear to have different
communication patterns due to the nature of their
work. As indicated above, the DL survey respond-
ents seem to have a greater reliance on email as
opposed to face-to-face communications and tend
to rate the relative effectiveness of email higher than
the DH respondents. There may be two reasons for
these differences that relate to the potential different
compositions of DL digital project teams as com-
pared to the DH teams. First, according to the re-
spondents, DL teams appear more likely to be
located within the same institution. As a result,
casual interpersonal interaction, when many crucial
conversations about a project may occur, may
happen more frequently among these teams. This
is in comparison to DH teams which appear to be
more geographically dispersed. These teams must
more deliberately plan meetings and interactions.
As a result, DH team members may have a higher
level of consciousness about the importance of this
kind of interaction and the necessity to build this
into project plans. Second, given that many of the
DL teams are within the same organization, team
members may be more familiar with each other in
advance of a project start, meaning that more com-
munication can be done by email. Less time may
need to be spent in formal meetings developing
work processes and trust among team members
than is the case with those teams whose members
may not have this history or personal knowledge of
colleagues. This situation was also found by
Lawrence (2006) in her review of a large e-research
science project.
6 Implications for Practice
From this comparison of the similarities and differ-
ences in collaborative approaches between DL and
DH communities, several implications for practice
can be outlined.
First, the use of teams is likely to increase, both
because of the nature of digital projects, but also
because funding agencies are encouraging this
trend by funding more team-oriented projects
(Office of Digital Humanities, 2010; SSHRC,
2004). As one DL interview respondent stated,
‘. . .in order to be competitive you could not
submit an application as an individual. You have
got to submit an application as a team. You have
to in order to be successful. You have no choice in
L. Siemens et al.
344 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the matter’ (DLI1). As a result, DL and DH com-
munities must determine appropriate team pro-
cesses to ensure that research can be funded and
ultimately completed.
Second, within those projects where individuals
from the DH and DL communities collaborate, the
team can build on the liaison librarian function as a
start of the partnership. In this regard, teams can
deliberately harness the strengths that Library and
Information Studies (LIS) professionals bring to the
digital project. In particular, librarians can assist
faculty in ‘broadening some communication or get-
ting stuff out there using open access’ (DLI5). In
other cases, the librarian may be the holder of the
items under study. Further, all team members need
to value the different intellectual contribution each
member can make and see the information expert as
being ‘useful in projects’ (DLI5), rather than there
in a service/support role. Ultimately, as highlighted
in the survey and interview results, this diversity of
skills and perspectives is required to achieve project
objectives.
In order to harness this diversity, teams must
begin collaboration by assuming and discussing dif-
ferences, rather than similarities. While everyone
may be a contributing force in the project, they
may not be approaching it with the same perspec-
tive or enthusiasm as others. As one of the DL
survey respondents stated, it is important that
team members ‘don’t make assumptions about
team members’ attitudes and knowledge. Respect
the curators’ deep knowledge of their subjects and
respect that their experiences with researchers are as
important to designing the end product as the in-
formation technology staff’s knowledge of the techy
bits’ (DLR57). This idea has been echoed in other
forums (Nowviskie, 2010).
It is at this point that the face-to-face discussions
become particularly important as forums to negoti-
ate differences, new working vocabularies specific
to a project, and project objectives, outcomes, and
tasks in advance of the ‘real’ project work (Cramton,
2001). As highlighted here and other places, it takes
time for trust to be built between team members, an
activity that can be more effectively done when all
members are physically present in one location
(Siemens, 2008; Handy, 1995). To facilitate these
discussions, it may be useful to have translators or
‘hybrid people’ who can talk across disciplinary cul-
tures, languages, and methodologies (Liu et al.,
2007; Lutz et al., 2008). Finally, these initial meet-
ings can also be the opportunity to explore the vari-
ous preferences for communication channels, such
as email, face-to-face, voice, and shared project
spaces, and to establish working norms for commu-
nication (Siemens, 2008). Ultimately, there needs to
be ‘enough F2F (face-to-face) time and opportu-
nities to build trust and working relationships
before relying heavily on electronic methods of
interaction and communication’ (DHR34).
Given the range of formal and informal training
in team processes, opportunities may exist to pro-
vide further skill development in this area. This
might include formal courses as well as coaching
for a specific team, as suggested by one DL interview
respondent. Training at the point of team establish-
ment can ensure that all members of a team have
same understanding of collaboration. Opportunities
may also exist to more formally include students in
these digital projects so that they can learn team
skills (Siemens et al., 2009a). Several examples of
this type of training through coursework and in-
ternships already exist where LIS and Humanities
students are placed with Digital Humanities
Centres to work on digital projects (Conway et al.,
2010; Sternfeld, 2010). These are important skills for
students, regardless of whether they remain in the
academy (Pearson, 1983; Bilodeau, 2007). In add-
ition, by placing students in contexts different from
their disciplinary training, they get exposure and
understanding of other disciplines, which will con-
tribute to their development as effective collabor-
ators. Drawing upon their experiences and
training in teams, DL community members could
also play a leadership role by transferring these im-
portant team skills to humanities scholars and other
team members with less experience. Further, these
experiences will also create more of the ‘hybrid
people’ who can easily move between DH and DL
projects, regardless of the particular position that
they occupy in the organization.
More team- and self-reflection might also be
incorporated to ensure active learning from these
projects. This process might include a review of
Implications of the similarities and differences in collaborative approaches
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 345
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
project documentation, benefits, challenges, and les-
sons learned (For example, see Liu et al., 2007;
Ruecker et al., 2007; Ramsay, 2008). In addition,
individual team members could also reflect on
their own performance and determine if they are
developing the appropriate collaborative mindset
or ‘understanding/ appreciation of each other’s dis-
ciplinary/profession perspectives’ in the words of
one respondent (DLR55). As highlighted in survey
results, the ‘right’ people for collaborative digital
projects are those who are able to see the value in
other perspectives and able to capitalize on the
many benefits associated with digital team work.
To encourage this reflection, grant funders might
consider requiring comment on this aspect in the
final project report as part of the assessment of
the team’s success (National Endowment for the
Humanities Office of Digital Humanities, 2010).
Finally, as these digital projects grow in scale,
scope, and diversity, more documentation may be
needed to ensure that these teams reach their re-
search objectives and show funding agencies and
other stakeholders that they are capable of under-
taking and completing a project. As one DL inter-
view respondent noted, their project:
. . . had to have a significant amount of organ-
ization, otherwise we wouldn’t have been
granted the millions of dollars we were
granted. SSHRC itself implements a small set
of what they call milestones, we call them
millstones, because they were millstones
around our necks. But nevertheless, they
were important because they were interim
steps. So, good organization, allowing clarity
of vision for all of the team members (DLI3).
These steps can be important even for small
projects.
Given that collaboration between these two com-
munities is likely to increase, more work should be
done to understand the nature of collaboration
within and between them. First, further research
should be undertaken to enlarge the size and
scope of the sample for both the interviews and
survey. Second, these respondents were predomin-
antly from an Anglophone context (USA, Canada,
and UK) and may approach collaboration
differently than those from other countries, cultures
and language groups. As the number of internation-
al collaborations increase, more work should be
done to understand these potential differences and
their impact on DH and DL teams (Siemens, 2010).
As these results show, the DL and DH commu-
nities are successfully using teams to undertake vari-
ous digital projects and collaborating with each
other. These teams in which the respondents are
involved have found ways to manage the various
challenges associated with this type of work while
also reaping the many benefits. This article’s recom-
mendations and conclusions are designed to sup-
port the already strong team work processes that
are in place.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary Data are available at LLC online.
Funding
This work was supported by the Social Science and
Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC)
through the Image, Text, Sound, and Technology
program.