Accessibility, Usability and the 
New Face of NINES
Dana Wheeles 
University of Virginia 
dw6h@cms.mail.virginia.edu
Laura Mandell 
Miami University of Ohio 
mandellc@muohio.edu
Nick Laiacona 
Performant Software 
nick@laiacona.com
NINES stands for a Networked Infrastructure for Nineteenth-century Electronic Scholarship, a 
scholarly organization in British and American nine-
teenth-century studies devoted to forging links between 
the material archive of the nineteenth century and the 
digital	research	environment	of	the	twenty-first.		In	prac-
tice, these efforts have centered on building a portal that 
enables faceted searches of digital scholarly resources 
that we have peer-reviewed. This web portal also allows 
users to collect object and build exhibits online.
When	NINES	first	launched	its	search	interface	in	2006,	
the institutional challenges of aggregating scholarly 
projects online were only the beginning. The NINES 
search and collect interface, powered by a Collecting 
and Exhibiting tool called Collex, was a new thing, rela-
tively speaking.  Users were (and still are) very familiar 
with the idea of search engines: Yahoo and Google have 
long played a central role in any internet experience. But 
faceted browsers, or tools that allow the user to continu-
ally	refine	the	categories	of	their	search	in	order	to	pin-
point resources from large pools of data, were in their 
infancy.	The	most	efficient	of	these	were	just	beginning	
to be implemented in the commercial sector: Amazon.
com is perhaps the best example of this. But the NINES 
team	needed	to	adapt	the	power	and	flexibility	of	a	fac-
eted browser for scholarly research (rather than online 
shopping) and design it in a way that communicated the 
organization’s	reputability	as	a	peer	reviewer	and a for-
ward-looking software developer for humanities schol-
ars. See the result below.
A left-hand sidebar doubled as a user tag cloud and a 
list of collected resources, while the central portion of 
the interface was dedicated to searching and browsing. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  199
Searches in a faceted browser can become quite elabo-
rate, so an area was needed to keep track of the con-
straints added by the user. The resources aggregated 
within NINES also needed ample screen real estate, as 
did the various genre designations of the objects for a 
different kind of browsing. Search results were listed be-
low this frame, and were often “below the fold,” requir-
ing scrolling. 
The	NINES	interface	was	a	difficult	thing	to	build,	and,	
overall, it was a successful endeavor. Scholarly interest 
in NINES grew, and the number of digital objects leapt 
from roughly 70,000 to a whopping 300,000. Yet we 
found ourselves with very little feedback about the us-
ability of this application. Were the targeted users (schol-
ars and students of nineteenth-century studies) comfort-
able with NINES? Were they making use of the many 
features Collex provided? The development team de-
cided to schedule a formal usability study to get answers.
As with any study of this kind, many of those answers 
were surprising. Five helpful participants in the NINES 
Summer workshop at Miami University demonstrated 
the strengths – and weaknesses – of the Collex interface.
As can be seen in this screenshot demonstrating the 
eye movement during one of the usability sessions, the 
user’s	focus	is	scattered	at	any	given	moment.	The	tag	
cloud at the left was an attractive feature, but its presence 
alongside search results put it in direct competition with 
them. Users frequently jumped back and forth from the 
tag cloud to the summary of the search results and the 
constraints. But once they found objects, users did not 
think of creating an account to collect those objects until 
they were prompted to do so by the test, and even then, 
creating a free account gave them pause. Although each 
person commented favorably on the variety and amount 
of information integrated into NINES, every single per-
son tested said that the interface was a mystery – this 
after having spent a full 20 minutes using it.
After some consideration of the results, we decided that 
the fundamental structure of Collex was sound: its fea-
tures were compelling and the searching capabilities at-
tractive. In a way, Collex was too powerful, to the extent 
that it was intimidating. Everything about our interface, 
from the Home page to the Collex engine, had been con-
ceived in scholarly and theoretical terms, and demanded 
a similar dedication from the user. And while NINES has 
always sought to appeal to the growing community dedi-
cated to the mission of excellence in digital scholarship, 
we never intended to limit our users exclusively to its 
membership. We wanted Collex to be a friendly envi-
ronment: a place where both scholars and their students 
go to conduct research in the nineteenth-century studies 
online. 
As we began to sketch out the Collex redesign, our pri-
mary goal was to break up the Collex interface into its 
component features, giving each one its own important 
area of the site. In many ways, our task was much simpler 
than the one that faced the original designers of Collex – 
in the intervening years, the number of faceted browsers 
had multiplied considerably leading to the emergence of 
web conventions for their styling and organization. Our 
‘market	research’	was	directed	to	what	worked	and	what	
didn’t	among	the	giants	of	internet	commerce:	Amazon’s	
browser	was	the	most	intuitive,	but	Ebay’s	method	of	dis-
playing search constraints was more informative. And, 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 200
it must be remembered, a scholar is not always looking 
for that one perfect object, as is the online shopper, but 
rather	a	collection	of	objects	that	fit	ever	more	specific	
requirements. Collex needed to allow users to tunnel into 
our	data	quickly	and	efficiently,	all	the	while	reminding	
them of the numerous other materials available.
The new NINES home page was designed to commu-
nicate	two	things:	first,	that	this	is	a	scholarly	organiza-
tion, and second, that searching is an integral part of the 
site.  Making use of the familiar Google search blank, 
we	hoped	 to	eliminate	our	 site’s	high	bounce	 rate	 (the	
number of visitors who leave almost immediately after 
arriving) and invite those with merely casual interest to 
stick around and explore.
The tag cloud – one of the most forward-looking and 
dynamic parts of the NINES interface – was given its 
own page, with plenty of room for browsing the interests 
of NINES users.
Tool tips and help text were added (“What are tags?”) 
whenever the use of features was subtle or required spe-
cialized	knowledge	of	social	media	software.	And	final-
ly, a space was reserved for a blog, so that users could 
appreciate NINES as an active and ever-growing institu-
tion,	rather	than	a	static	website	or	finding	aid.
But	 as	 these	 refinements	 were	 implemented,	 we	 kept	
running into a logical disconnect between the kinds 
of operations one could do in NINES. Searching and 
browsing are available to any and everyone who visits 
the site, and are easily found in the main navigation tabs. 
However, what makes NINES unique is that is also a 
scholarly workspace: after setting up an account, you are 
able to collect objects, tag them, and re-mix them into 
a	 essay	 or	 “Exhibit”	 of	 your	 own.	NINES	 is	 first	 and	
foremost conceived as a community for scholars, a place 
where	one	can	simultaneously	contribute	to	and	benefit	
from an ongoing discourse on nineteenth-century stud-
ies. Unfortunately, even with the new design, this aspect 
of our mission was still not clear.
Taking a cue from Facebook, Flickr and other social me-
dia sites, the NINES team conceived the “My 9s” page, 
each	user’s	private	homepage	within	NINES.
On this page, all your authoring, editing and collecting 
efforts are centralized: as a user you have control over 
how much of your personal information is shared with 
other users while your tags, saved searches and recently 
collected items are easily accessed. Exhibits, which had 
previously been a mysterious and intimidating option 
are now offered as a logical outcome of all your work 
within NINES – why not share some of that hard work 
with your peers? By enlarging the (pre-existing) social 
networking attributes of NINES, we were able to fully 
demonstrate the power and utility of Collex, all the while 
making the many operations possible within it appear 
more manageable and enticing. 
Going forward, we hope to incorporate other social net-
working protocols to encourage the growth of a commu-
nity of NINES scholars. The “My 9s” page is an initial 
step in this direction, and we are also planning a NINES 
Facebook application, which will allow us to leverage an 
existing social network to form our own.  Because of the 
way NINES is structured, we are only as strong as the 
community that we are able to build. Part of this process 
involves peer-review and aggregation via RDF metada-
ta; our summer workshops for new projects are another 
important activity in this regard. But our web interface 
and software tools are central to the ways that NINES 
will gather scholars together. Through a combination 
of usability studies, development meetings, discussions 
with	 scholars	 in	 the	 field,	 and	 pure	 trial-and-error,	we	
have come to recognize the importance of re-tooling, an 
ongoing process that is constantly engaged with the so-
cial and technical ecology of the web.
 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  201
