An Exercise in Non-Ideal 
Authorship Attribution
David L. Hoover 
New York University 
david.hoover@nyu.edu
Much has been written about the appropriate condi-tions for non-traditional authorship (e.g., Rudman 
1997). Substantial known samples by the possible au-
thors of a disputed text should be available, they should 
be controlled for genre, point of view, etc., and addition-
al similar texts should be available from other contem-
porary	authors	to	show	that	false	positive	identifications	
are unlikely. Less attention has been paid to authorship 
problems compelling enough to demand an attempt in 
spite of less-than-ideal conditions. One such case is Ma-
ria	Ward’s	 Female	 Life	 Among	 the	Mormons	 (1855),	
one of four widely read books published in 1855-56 that 
were largely responsible for the litany of anti-Mormon 
literature of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, in-
cluding works by Arthur Conan Doyle, Zane Grey, Rob-
ert	Louis	Stevenson,	and	Mark	Twain.	(The	first	edition	
of Female Life sold at least 40,000 copies; within three 
years it had been translated into Danish, French, Ger-
man, Hungarian, and Swedish (Worldcat).) 
Female Life, published as an anonymous autobiographi-
cal	account,	was	early	panned	and	labeled	fiction	(New 
York Times 1855), and there is strong evidence that ‘Ma-
ria	Ward,’	who	also	claims	to	have	‘edited’	Austin	Ward’s	
The Husband in Utah (1857) is a pseudonym (the book 
was later published as Male Life Among the Mormons; I 
refer to it as Male Life below). Confusingly both Ward 
books	are	sometimes	categorized	as	fiction,	and	Mrs	B.	
G. Ferris is sometimes listed as a (second) author of Fe-
male Life (Worldcat). Moreover, both Mr and Mrs Ferris 
wrote	non-fictional	anti-Mormon	books–his	a	history	of	
Utah and Mormonism, Utah and the Mormons (1854), 
hers a memoir, The Mormons at Home (1856). Finally, 
efforts	to	confirm	Ferris’s	authorship	of	Female Life led 
Arrington and Haupt (1968: 253) to conclude that she 
did not write it, but that her book may have provided the 
basis for Male Life. 
A Computational Analysis 
The case of Female Life	certainly	qualifies	as	a	non-ideal	
authorship attribution problem. Each of the four authors 
of interest apparently wrote only one book. All four 
books	are	framed	as	non	fiction,	but	some	extraordinary	
errors	and	the	fact	that	‘Maria	Ward’	and	‘Austin	Ward’	
are	likely	pseudonyms	suggests	that	their	books	are	fic-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 142
tion, makes their gender doubtful, and suggests that they 
may be two pseudonyms for one person. Additionally, 
only	the	middle	third	of	Mrs	Ferris’s	book	deals	with	the	
Mormons, and the attribution of Female Life to her is 
tenuous and unexplained. The most important facts are 
these: 
B. G. Ferris Utah and 
the  
Mormons
Non-fiction 3rd-Person Male
Mrs B. G. 
Ferris
The  
Mormons at 
Home
Non-fiction 1st-Person Female
Austin Ward 
(Maria 
Ward?)
Male Life Fiction? 1st-Person Male?
Maria Ward 
(Mrs Ferris?)
Female Life Fiction? 1st-Person Fe-
male?
Given this less-than-ideal scenario, can we shed any light 
on the authorship of Female Life? I begin with a group 
of	large,	Mormon-related,	first-person	fiction	and	nonfic-
tion texts. With many candidate authors, any similarities 
between	Mrs	Ferris	and	Maria	Ward	will	be	more	signifi-
cant. In Fig. 1, only Kane and Stenhouse are represented 
by	pairs	of	texts,	and	Stenhouse’s	texts	fail	to	cluster.	Yet	
‘StenhouseMa’	is	an	excerpt	from	Tell it All that suppos-
edly	 relates	Mary	Burton’s	story	 in	her	own	words,	 so	
that	 this	 is	 not	 a	definite	 error.	Adding	Mrs	Ferris	 and	
Maria	Ward	(Fig.	2),	does	not	support	Ferris’s	authorship	
of Female Life:	the	two	authors’	texts	are	widely	separat-
ed,	but	the	close	clustering	of	the	Wards’	texts	suggests	
a single author. (In the captions, NP 70% indicates that 
no personal pronouns are included and words are elimi-
nated if a single text accounts for more than 70% of their 
occurrences. Pronouns are closely tied to the number and 
gender of characters; words that are frequent because of 
a single text are typically character names.) 
Fig. 1 Large Mormon 1st person only–without Ward &  
Ferris 
Fig. 2 Large Mormon 1st person only–including Ward & 
Ferris 
Large 1 and 3 Person Mormon and Non-
Mormon Texts 
A larger set of texts with more pairs by single authors 
allows me to train the method on similar texts, select 
the most effective analysis, then insert Ward and Ferris 
and re-test–compensating for the lack of primary au-
thor training texts. Consider then 32 large Mormon and 
non-Mormon texts (Fig. 3). Eleven of thirteen pairs by 
known authors cluster together, capturing known au-
thorship very effectively, though most contain Mormon 
non-Mormon texts. The two failures may not be errors: 
Stenhouse’s	 texts	are	discussed	above,	and	Bell	claims	
only	to	have	‘prepared’	Stephens’s	Rebel Cousins. Add-
ing	Maria	Ward’s	and	the	Ferrises’s	texts	(Mrs	Ferris’s	in	
three sections, isolating the Mormon part), produces Fig. 
4. The known texts cluster as before, and the Wards form 
a tight cluster separate from the Ferrises, whose own 
close clustering may suggest collaboration. (A smaller 
set of Mormon-related texts with the dialogue deleted to 
eliminate any effects of different proportions of dialogue 
and narration, produces similar results.) 
Fig. 3 Large 1 and 3 person Mormon and non-Mormon 
texts–without Ward & Ferris 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  143
Fig. 4 Large 1 and 3 person Mormon and non-Mormon 
texts–including Ward & Ferris 
Delta Analysis 
Delta analysis is problematic here because of the com-
plexity of the case, but several analyses with different 
configurations	of	primary	and	secondary	authors	never	
strongly identify Mrs Ferris as the author of Female Life, 
though a few identify her as the author of Male Life when 
Maria Ward is not among the primary authors. When ei-
ther of the Wards is included among the primary authors, 
however,	 he	or	 she	 is	 regularly	 and	 strongly	 identified	
as	the	author	of	the	other	Ward’s	text.	(For	discussion	of	
Delta, see Burrows 2002 and Hoover 2004.) 
T-Tests 
It seems worthwhile to try another approach using t-
tests. Each test assumes that two of our three main au-
thors (Maria and Austin Ward and Mrs Ferris) are dif-
ferent, uses t-tests to create a set of words that strongly 
differentiate them, and then uses these words to test the 
third author with PCA (principal components analysis). 
(The method is inspired by Burrows 1992.) This makes 
sense, however, only if we know what to expect when 
each set of assumptions is false, so I begin with several 
sets of three known texts by one, two, or three authors. 
In two of three tests involving three texts by one author, 
the third text intermingles with one of the two texts dis-
tinguished by the t-tested words. In the third test, how-
ever, the three texts remain quite distinct. Thus, if Mrs 
Ferris wrote all three texts and they cluster separately, 
no conclusions can be drawn. With three texts by two 
authors, t-tests that distinguish two texts by one author 
and those that distinguish two texts by two authors pro-
duce very different results. In the former case, all three 
texts typically cluster separately (Fig. 5); in the latter, the 
two texts by the same author are separate from that of the 
third on component one, but not from each other. In two 
of the three cases tested, they also mingle on component 
two (Fig. 6). T-tests involving two texts by one author 
also typically produce far fewer discriminating words 
(275) than those involving  two authors (677). Finally, 
in all tests involving three authors, the three texts remain 
quite distinct, whichever authors are assumed to be dif-
ferent. 
Once the three scenarios have been explored, we can 
compare these results with tests on our authors of inter-
est. Assuming the two Wards are different and testing 
Mrs Ferris as an unknown (narrative only, approximately 
27,000 words for each of the Wards and 18,000 for Fer-
ris) yields Fig. 7. (Tests on the three whole texts produce 
similar results.) T-tests involving one author, three au-
thors, or two authors (when the wrong assumption of dif-
ference is made) can produce similar graphs, though the 
small number of discriminating words supports the last 
possibility. But Fig. 8. and Fig. 9, with one of the Wards 
tested against Ferris and the other Ward as unknown, 
produce patterns like that in Fig. 6, patterns consistent 
with the results from Delta and the various cluster analy-
ses above: Mrs Ferris is unlikely to have written either 
Female Life or Male Life, and Maria and Austin Ward 
seem very likely to be two pseudonyms for the same per-
son (whose identity remains a mystery). 
Fig. 5 Grey (Rainbow) vs Grey (Riders), with Phillips 
unknown (275 words p<.05) 
Fig. 6 Grey (Rainbow) vs. Phillips (Conflict) with Grey 
unknown (677 words p<.05) 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 144
Fig. 7 Austin Ward vs Maria Ward, with Mrs Ferris 
unknown 
Fig. 8 Austin Ward vs Mrs Ferris, with Maria Ward 
unknown 
Fig. 9 Maria Ward vs Mrs Ferris, With Austin Ward 
Unknown 
Conclusion 
Considering	 the	 level	 of	 difficulty	 of	 this	 authorship	
problem, the results seems quite persuasive. They sug-
gest that combining several different approaches across 
many analyses can help to compensate for the lack of 
training texts. Finally, comparing results based on false 
and true assumptions in simulations with known authors 
to the results of similar tests involving the texts in ques-
tion can provide worthwhile results even under condi-
tions that are far from ideal. 
References 
Arrington, Leonard J., and Jon Haupt. (1968). Intoler-
able Zion: The Image of Mormonism in Nineteenth Cen-
tury American Literature, Western Humanities Review, 
22: 243-260. 
Burrows, John F. (1992). Not Unless You Ask Nicely: 
The Interpretative Nexus Between Analysis and Infor-
mation, LLC 7: 91-109. 
Burrows,	John	F.	(2002a).	‘Delta’:	A	Measure	of	Stylis-
tic Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship, LLC 
17: 267-287. 
Ferris, Benjamin G. (1854). Utah and the Mormons. 
New York: Harper & Brothers. 
Ferris, Mrs Benjamin G. (1856). The Mormons at Home. 
New York, Dix & Edwards. 
Hoover,	David	L.	(2004).	Testing	Burrows’s	Delta,	LLC 
19: 453-475. 
Review of Female Life Among the Mormons. (1855). 
The New York Times. July 14: 3. 
Rudman, Joseph. (1997). The State of Authorship Attri-
bution Studies: Some Problems and Solutions, Comput-
ers and the Humanities 31: 351-65. 
Ward, Austin N. (1857). The Husband in Utah. Maria 
Ward (ed.). New York: Derby & Jackson; republished 
as Male Life Among the Mormons, Philadelphia: John E. 
Potter and Company, 1863. 
Ward, Maria. (1855). Female Life Among the Mormons. 
New York: J. C. Derby. 
Worldcat. (2001-2008). Dublin, Ohio: OCLC Online 
Computer Library Center, Inc. Online. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  145
