Audio-visual Rhetoric and its 
Methods of Visualization  
Introducing	visual	notation	systems	for	film	
analysis 
Gesche Joost 
Deutsche Telekom AG Laboratories 
gesche.joost@telekom.de
Sandra Buchmüller 
Deutsche Telekom AG Laboratories 
Sandra.Buchmueller@telekom.de
Tom Bieling
Deutsche Telekom AG Laboratories 
Tom.Bieling@telekom.de
Abstract 
In this paper, we use information design of rhetorical theory in order to investigate the structure of audio-
visual media. From a design research perspective, we are 
especially interested in the power of visualization. In this 
respect,	we	compare	different	methods	of	film	analysis	
referring to their representation mode and evaluate them 
referring to their ability to visualize the cinematic struc-
ture.	Within	the	realm	of	film	analysis,	we	ask	:	
•	 How can the use of information design enhance the 
traditional	analysis	of	film?	
•	 What	is	the	influence	of	the	selected	semiotic	code	
(text, image, or animation) on the interpretation of 
the medium and its structure? 
To answer these questions, we introduce examples of vi-
sual	notation	systems	that	were	applied	to	analyze	film	
sequences within a project. We discuss their method and 
value	for	the	purpose	of	analysis	and	reflect	on	the	role	
of the different semiotic codes that are applied. Refer-
ring to the traditional method of analysis in the form of 
written	film	protocols,	we	hypothesize	that	this	method	
is attended by a high loss of structural information when 
transferring	the	audio-visual,	dynamic	code	of	film	into	
written	 text.	 While	 film	 protocols	 are	 more	 appropri-
ate for content, respectively plot analyses, we state that 
static and dynamic visual notations are suitable forms 
for	 making	 structural	 and	 rhetoric	 phenomena	 of	 film	
explicit. Visual notations might cause the least loss of 
information in the analytical process, and might of high 
value	for	academic	film	analysis.	
Background 
Audio-visual rhetoric is a knowledge domain for design-
ers in theory and practice that was introduced by Gui 
Bonsiepe in the 1960ies (Bonsiepe 1961). Its theory and 
communication system is valid for all communicative 
actions aiming for persuasion. Richard Buchanan de-
scribed the whole body of design practice as rhetorical 
argumentation (Buchanan 1989) and opened the way 
for a rhetorical design theory on a broad basis. In the 
following, visual rhetoric was established within the 
design education mostly in the US, teaching the analy-
sis of information design on the basis of rhetorical pat-
terns (Ehses 1984, 1986, 1988), (Kostelnick 1989, 1998, 
2003), (Poggenpohl 1998). These concepts were trans-
ferred to dynamic, audio-visual media by Bonsiepe in the 
late 1990ies, and he introduced the term “Audio-visual 
Rhetoric” (Bonsiepe 2008). Today, this theory combines 
the ancient communication theory and its huge body of 
knowledge with New Rhetoric (Joost 2008, 2008a) and 
applies this knowledge to the design domain and its vi-
sual approaches. 
The Notation System for Film Analysis 
Exploring	audio-visual	patterns	of	film	is	an	analytical	
endeavor that is still in search for a useful method. In 
film	 theory	 and	 practice,	 there	 are	 different	models	 to	
describe	 and	 analyze	 filmic	 structures.	 For	 film	 schol-
ars,	the	most	established	method	is	using	a	written	film	
protocol to elaborate on formal aspects as well as on nar-
rative structures. This method was questioned by many 
scholars	because	of	the	lack	of	potential	to	reflect	on	the	
specific	dynamic	and	audio-visual	quality	of	film	(Leh-
ner 1987). Audio-visual rhetoric provides an approach to 
overcome this problem by introducing a notation system 
for	film.	In	academic	context,	there	are	some	examples	
of	visual	film	protocols	(Hahne	1992),	(Ramsbott	/	Sau-
ter 1988). Nevertheless, none of the visual systems has 
been	established	 for	film	analysis	 in	 a	broader	 context	
and	has	not	yet	reflected	the	progressing	nature	of	film.	
A general issue is that there is no interdisciplinary col-
laboration	between	study	of	film,	film	production,	rheto-
ric, and design research to come up with an applicable 
system. Bringing together all these competences, one 
could design a comprehensive system that could be used 
in various contexts – academic as well as applied. In this 
context, we discuss the impact of the semiotic code on 
the	film	analysis	(Table	1).	
Comparison between different notation 
systems for analysis 
When applying rhetorical knowledge to the analysis of 
film,	we	take	the	following	steps.	We	raise	the	hypoth-
esis	that	a	visual	analysis	of	film	conveys	a	visual knowl-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 158
edge about the rhetorical structure of media. This form 
of knowledge can hardly be expressed verbally. Ernst 
Gombrich claims what the diagram presents in front of 
our eyes can hardly be expressed by words – as a succes-
sion of statements (Gombrich 1984). An example for this 
hypothesis is the visualization of the spatial information 
on a map. This complex information that is accessible 
parallel on one sight can hardly be expressed verbally in 
a	cognitively	efficient	process.	Based	on	this	hypothesis,	
we introduce different notation systems to visualize re-
curring	patterns	in	film:	a	static	visual	film	protocol	(Fig.	
1),	an	animated	film	protocol	(Fig.	2),	and	a	written	text	
protocol. 
Fig. 2: Animated Film Protocol http://www.geschejoost.
org/AVRhetorik/ 
In	 the	 standard	film	protocol,	 the	 translation	 of	 audio-
visual signs into a written text means to change the se-
miotic code in a radical way – from image and sound to 
text. This process involves a loss of information, par-
ticularly of the audio-visual and dynamic quality of the 
sign system. The idea of using a visual protocol as tool 
for	film	analysis	is	based	on	the	hypothesis	that	a	visual	
diagram	can	be	processed	cognitively	much	more	effi-
cient than language (Bonsiepe 2008). This is especially 
true	for	the	visual	aspects	of	film	and	not	for	re-telling	
its storyline. It is not new to say that the tools and meth-
ods	 that	 are	used	 for	an	 investigation	clearly	 influence	
the research results. This is also true for the method we 
suggest	in	this	paper.	To	set	up	a	visual	diagram	of	film	
focuses much more on visual and structural aspects than 
on the storyline. The aim is to reduce a loss of informa-
tion	that	occurs	when	the	audio	-visual	texture	of	film	is	
transferred	to	written	film	protocol.	Therefore,	the	audio-
visual signs are translated into a visual structure. This 
method has additional advantages: the graphic displays 
information on one sight so that the recipient can pro-
cess the data in parallel. Written text can communicate 
information only in a successive way – one word after 
the other. In the notation protocol, information about the 
whole clip in each of the channels can be visualized at 
the same time, allowing a parallel interpretation of data 
and of relationships among the various audio -visual ele-
ments.	Here,	the	pattern	structure	can	be	easily	identified	
on the basis of a graphical representation. For example, 
repetitions or climax patterns can be singled out quickly 
on the basis of their visual form. With this approach, 
large amounts of data from audio visual media can be ef-
ficiently	 processed	 for	 analytical	 purposes.	 In	 the	 next	
step, we compared the different systems according to 
their semiotic code, their mode of information and the 
kind of perception they require. 
Static visual Film 
Protocol 
Animated-
visual Film 
Protol 
Written Film 
Protocol 
Sign system 
(Zeichensys-
tem) 
image, language image, sound, 
language 
language 
Semiotic 
code 
icon, index, sym-
bol (Peirce) 
icon, index, 
symbol 
(Peirce) 
symbol 
(Peirce) 
Change of 
media 
film	to	image	 film	to	filmA		 film	to	 
language 
Reception synchronic synchronic 
and succes-
sive 
successive 
Fig. 1: Static visual Film Protocol
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  159
Mode of 
information 
spatial spatial, 
temporal and 
acoustic 
temporal 
Link to 
rhetoric 
 evidentia  (evi-
dence) 
analogy argumentation 
Table 1: Comparison of different Methods of Film Analysis 
Discussion 
One	finding	 is	 that	a	verbal	analysis,	on	 the	one	hand,	
is	much	more	focused	on	content	and	storyline	of	a	film	
and translates the audio-visual medium into a verbal 
narration. It uses the symbol as semiotic code and re-
quires a successive perception. Its mode of information 
is temporal. The visual analysis, on the other hand, is 
more	focused	on	the	visual	structure	of	film	and	its	recur-
ring patterns. It uses icon, index, and symbol as semiotic 
code and requires a synchronic perception. Therefore, it 
displays spatial information. An animated protocol adds 
dynamic	information	about	the	development	of	film	and	
includes	 the	 analyzed	 film	 itself	 into	 the	 animation.	 It	
also refers to icon, index and symbol in its semiotic code 
and requires synchronic as well as successive percep-
tion. Its mode of information is rich and includes spatial, 
temporal and acoustic data. Through visual approaches 
such as static visual protocols as well as animated ones, 
a different kind of knowledge is gained compared to a 
mere	 verbal	 analysis:	 a	 specific	 kind	 of	 visual knowl-
edge. This study argues in favor of a semiotic autonomy 
of visual signs. 
Conclusion 
The	visual	film	protocol	can	serve	developers	of	audio	
-visual media in various ways. First of all, it is a help-
ful	tool	to	analyze	and	interpret	film	and	understand	its	
composition.	Moreover,	 the	static	visual	film	protocols	
make	different	films	structurally	comparable.	Using	the	
notation system one gets a visual protocol comparable to 
music notations that can be used for reproduction pur-
poses. This leads to the third point: the notation system 
as	a	software	could	be	used	as	tool	for	film	design	and	
planning in addition to the technique of storyboarding, 
which is still a standard tool for the production process. 
With	this	visual	aid,	film	makers	can	compose	their	tex-
ture beyond sketches of the scene and visual description. 
Based on these insights, we suggested the notation sys-
tem	as	a	new	tool	for	film	analysis	for	designers	as	well	
as	for	film	scholars.	
References 
Bonsiepe, G. (1961). Persuasive Communication: To-
wards a Visual Rhetoric. In Crosby, T. (Eds.) Uppercase 
Nr. 5, London, UK, 19–34. 
Bonsiepe, G. (2008). Audiovisualistische Rhetorik in 
zeitbasierten Medien: Über die kognitive Relevanz dia-
grammatischer Visualisierungen. In: Joost, G., Scheuer-
mann, A. Design als Rhetorik. Birkhäuser Verlag Basel. 
217-232. 
Buchanan, R. (1985): Declaration by Design: Rhetoric, 
Argument, and Demonstration. In Design Issues, Vol-
ume II, Number 1. 4-23; Reprint in: Margolin, V. (1989) 
(Ed.): Design Discourse. History, Theory, Criticism, 
Chicago. 91-109. 
Gombrich, E. (1984): Representation and Misrepresen-
tation (Reply to Murray Kreiger) In Critical Inquiry, Vol-
ume 11, 2, Chicago. 195-201. 
Hahne, D. (1992). Komposition und Film: Projekt nach 
Motiven aus Camus „Der Abtrünnige“ für Chor, Orches-
ter	und	Spielfilm.	 (Volkwang-Texte	 III.	Bd.	5.	Hrsg.	v.	
Josef Fellsches). 
Lehner, C. (1987). Einige zentrale Probleme der 
neueren Filmsemiotik. In Bauer, L., Ledig, E., Schaudig, 
M.	(Eds.)	Diskurs	film:	Strategien	der	Filmanalyse.	Bd.	
1 , München, Germany, pp. 59–72. 
Joost, G. (2008): Die rhetorische Pattern-Language des 
Films. In Joost, G., Scheuermann, A. (Eds.) Design als 
Rhetorik, Birkhäuser Verlag Basel, 233 – 249. 
Joost, G. (2008a) Film-Sprache. Die audio-vi-
suelle Rhetorik des Films. Bielefeld. See also: 
http://www.geschejoost.org/AVRhetorik/ 
Ramsbott, W., Sauter, J. (1988). Visualisierung von 
Filmstrukturen mit rechnergestützen Mitteln. In: Helmut 
Korte, Werner Faulstich (Hrsg.): Filmanalyse inter-
disziplinär. (Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und 
Linguistik. Hrsg. v. Helmut Kreuzer. Beiheft 15). Göt-
tingen. pp. 156–165. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 160
