Babylon: Displacement and Re-
creation of Calderón’s Life is a 
Dream
Elizabeth	Sofia	Lagresa 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
elagresa@gmail.com
With the emergence of digital texts and the move-ment to digitize existing texts, a complementary 
push to develop digital means of textual analysis con-
tinues to surface.  New digital analysis tools can draw 
on large databases of texts or apply multiple analysis 
methods to a single text in minutes.  Thus, digital textual 
analysis potentially provides the opportunity to exam-
ine large amounts of texts in scant time (Moretti, 2007), 
while offering visualization potentials that exceed that of 
texts.  For example, these tools can create graphs of word 
occurrences, map those occurrences according to con-
cordance, or remove all occurrences of a word to show 
its frequency in a text.
Described by Rockwell (2003) as exploring “the ques-
tion of the relationship between how we represent texts, 
how we see them, and our theories of textuality,” tex-
tual analysis generally seeks to identify patterns within 
the text, such as concordance or unity (Rockwell, 2003), 
meaning (Samuels & McGann, 1999), truth (Brooks, 
1947), or rhetorical strategy (Bazerman & Prior, 2004). 
Yet, another implication of digital textual analysis is that 
it involves the re-creation of a text.  This provides an op-
portunity for us to develop a heightened understanding 
of what is the role of readers and writers as co-creators of 
literature, and establishes the theoretical basis necessary 
to link textual analysis with translation.  As its Latin root 
translatio (to transfer, to carry, to bring across, to dis-
place)	suggests,	 translation’s	basic	 function	 is	 to	move	
meanings from one context to another; consequently, 
translation can denote concepts such as paraphrase, 
decoding, interpretation, communication, and even re-
creation. 
Borges’	 theory	 of	 translation,	 as	 illustrated	 in	 his	 fa-
mous works “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote” and 
“The Translators of the One Thousand and One Nights,” 
opens up a world of limitless possibilities by elevating 
translation from an act of reproduction to one of re-cre-
ation.		In	the	fictional	short	story	Pierre Menard, Borges 
highlights the importance of the context, the reader and 
the translator as co-creators of meaning, ushering a new 
theory of literary criticism and translation that trivializes 
the preoccupation with notions such as faithfulness, au-
thorship and originality.  He supports this theory in his 
essay on the translators of the Arabian Nights, by mak-
ing	the	translator’s	infidelities	into	what	is	most	impor-
tant and valued.  As a result, he demonstrates that literary 
translations can produce diverse representations of the 
foreign text and culture, which ultimately enrich both 
languages and texts through the act of remaking.  
Utilizing	Borges’	theory	as	the	conceptual	backbone,	this	
project blends traditional and digital methods of textual 
analysis to create visualizations (tag clouds, word trees, 
influential	 word	 maps)	 that	 serve	 as	 entry	 points	 for	
analysis.  With the goal in mind of investigating transla-
tion theory, the paper studies the effects of man-made, 
machine-made translations, and digital text-analyses of 
a passage from Spanish Golden Age drama.  This ap-
proach provides a greater understanding of how Spanish 
source editions (Cruickshank, and Williamsen), man-
made translations (Racz, FitzGerald, and MacCarthy), 
and machine-made translations (Babylon software) ver-
sions	 of	 a	 soliloquy	 from	Calderón’s	 play	 “La	vida	 es	
sueño,” compare and contrast to one another.  To re-cre-
ate both source and man-made translation texts the Baby-
lon	translation	software	tool	was	applied,	first	to	convert	
them from Spanish into English, or English into Spanish, 
and then to translate those versions back into the origi-
nal language, Spanish or English.  After completing the 
first	level	operation	of	running	the	source	text	repeatedly	
and recursively through the Babylon translation software 
application, which utilizes a statistical approach to au-
tomatic language translation and natural language pro-
cessing, the second level operation was set in motion. 
This level involved decomposing all online texts (source 
editions, man-made translations, machine-made transla-
tions) into their constituent elements and patterns with 
the aid of text-analysis and statistical visualization tools. 
In order to compare and contrast all versions amongst 
themselves and with each other, various text-analysis 
tools, namely TagCrowd, TAPoR, ManyEyes and Craw-
dad were utilized to visualize word patterns, themes, 
and word frequencies along with their importance.  It is 
significant	to	note	that	the	tools	trended	toward	certain	
forms of interpretation, and that these trends affected the 
types of analysis possible, but, more importantly, they 
could also be re-purposed for alternative approaches.  
The two tools that were found to be the most useful for 
the comparison of different versions, as well as for their 
application to Spanish texts, were ManyEyes and Craw-
dad.  ManyEyes was employed to generate tag clouds 
and word trees.  While tag clouds were used to visualize 
word frequencies with number of occurrences in their 
context, which is useful in comparing word usage pat-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  189
terns; word trees were particularly helpful in visualiz-
ing individual words, phrases and punctuation concor-
dances show within their respective context in order to 
reveal recurrent themes.  Crawdad, on the other hand, 
was	employed	to	visualize	a	network	of	the	most	influ-
ential words and their interconnections, along with their 
frequency of co-occurrence.  The tool also provided in-
fluence	scores,	which	served	as	indicators	of	high	coher-
ence and focus in the text. 
The overall intent of the project is not to determine which 
version is more faithful to the “original,” but rather to 
explore	how	these	creative	“infidelities”	and	re-creations	
enrich both languages and cultures.  Through translation 
and digital textual analysis we can illuminate the chal-
lenges and possibilities presented by the transformation/
displacement of seemingly discrete national, cultural and 
literary territorialities.  For example, of particular inter-
est in the research results is the appearance of deviations 
in minor themes, which demonstrate that, although, main 
themes predictably correlate closely across versions, 
subordinate themes follow less predictable patterns.  By 
studying these variations we can explore how each re-
creation	reflects	 the	 intersection	between	 languages,	as	
well as the existence of latent possibilities of diverse 
meaning contained within the source text.  The result 
is	 the	development	of	a	networked	fidelity	 framework,	
which rejects the traditional faithful/unfaithful binary 
that has predominated in translation studies.
The project corroborates the impossibility of a word for 
word translation and even edition, and further supports 
the acceptance of multiple versions as all simultaneously 
genuine	and	divergent,	while	highlighting	the	difficulty	
and futility of placing versions in a hierarchy.  Addition-
ally, since all translations must be equally encompassed 
as “unfaithful,” they can also be judged as “faithful,” 
highlighting the fact that translation is an act of subjec-
tive interpretation and re-creation.  Consequently, trans-
lation (be it machine or man-made) shares similarities 
not only with text-analysis, but also with deformance, 
and the profound subjectivity from which critical insight 
emerges.  This posits that translations not only have the 
power to share the work with a wider culture, but also to 
enrich both languages and texts through the act of remak-
ing.  This, in turn, establishes the possibility of equating 
translation to a creative process that results in unique 
text, eliminating the hierarchical divide that exists be-
tween author and translator, and original and translation, 
as	envisioned	by	Borges’	theory	of	translation.
Furthermore, the project shows that digital visualization 
tools for “distant” reading and traditional methods of 
close reading do inform and complement each other to 
expand our understanding of all texts, including those 
in translation.  However, do to their dependence on each 
other	they	do	require	flexibility	in	order	to	switch	back	
and forth between both modes of interpretation.  Lastly, 
there	 are	 many	 possible	 ramifications	 of	 this	 research	
project.  For example, the use of machine-assisted trans-
lation for the analysis (and interpretation) of transla-
tions, not just for the actual generation of translated 
texts, as well as an alternative way to explore how mean-
ing is constructed and re-constructed in literature. 
Works Cited
Babylon: Translation at a single click. 1997-2007. Bab-
ylon Ltd. 13 Feb. 2008. <http://www.babylon.com/>.
Bazerman, Charles and P. Prior What Writing Does and 
How it Does it. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence 
Earlbaum Associates, 2004.
Borges, Jorge Luis. “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quix-
ote.” Ficciones. English Trans. Buenos Aires: Editorial 
Sur, 1944. 88-95.
- - - . “The Translators of the One Thousand and One 
Nights.” Trans. Esther Allen. The Translation Studies 
Reader. Ed. Lawrence Venuti. 2nd ed. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2004. 94-108.
Brooks, Cleanth The Well Wrought Urn: Studies in the 
Structure of Poetry. Orlando, Florida: Harcourt Brace & 
Company, 1947. 
McCarty, Willard, Humanities Computing New York: 
Palgrave MacMillan, 2005.
Moretti, Franco. Graphs Maps Trees: Abstract Models 
for a Literary History. London: Verso, 2007. 
Samuels, Lisa Jerome McGann. “Deformance and Inter-
pretation.” New Literary History, 30.1 (1999): 25-56. 
Rockwell, G. “What is Text Analysis, Really?” Literary 
and Linguistic Computing, 18 (2003): 209-219.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 190
