Burying Dead Projects: 
Depositing the Globalization 
Compendium
Geoffrey Rockwell
University of Alberta
geoffrey.rockwell@ualberta.ca
Shawn Day
Digital Humanities Observatory
shawn@shawnday.com	
Introduction 
How do you end a project? Usually in our confer-ences we talk about imagining projects, starting 
them, getting funding, gaining respect, managing them 
and their research outcomes – but how often do we think 
about their ends, how we close them down and leave our 
digits behind for others. In this paper we propose to dis-
cuss the ends of a particular digital project, the SSHRC 
funded Globalization and Autonomy online Compen-
dium. In the paper we will do the following:
1. Provide background to the project. 
2. Demonstrate the major digital outcome of the proj-
ect, the Globalization Compendium. 
3. Discuss the problem of ending and how the project 
has been deposited. 
4. And conclude by talking about the challenges of 
closing projects gracefully. 
Project Background 
The Globalization and Autonomy Online Compendium 
was one of two major coordinated outcomes of the Glo-
balization and Autonomy project. The other outcome 
was a 10 volume academic book series being published 
by UBC Press. The project was supported by an MCRI 
grant of $2.5 million from the Social Sciences and Hu-
manities Research Council that was awarded in 2002.  [1] 
 
The project was led by William Coleman at McMaster 
University, and involved over forty co-investigators in 
twelve universities across Canada and another twenty 
academic contributors around the world, not to men-
tion the graduate students funded and staff. Unlike 
some projects, the digital component was woven in 
from the beginning. It was written in, budgeted, and re-
viewed. This included a review of the online Compen-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  227
dium by UBC press as part of the review of the book 
series. We also promised that the online component 
would be deposited and budgeted for that process. [2] 
 
The core research objective of the project was “To in-
vestigate the relationship between globalization and the 
processes of securing and building autonomy.” The proj-
ect was intended and administered to understand global-
ization in a collaborative and interdisciplinary way that 
avoided the often political and economic focus of global-
ization research. Hence the “autonomy” in the title - to 
explore globalization and resistance to globalization.
Demonstration 
We will demonstrate the following aspects of the Online 
Compendium in order to illustrate some of the challeng-
es faced when depositing it:
•	 Home page: we will discuss the scope of the Com-
pendium 
•	 Connection to Volumes: we will discuss how the 
Compendium and print volumes are connected
•	 Types of documents: we will show the different 
types of documents included and how they are 
linked. There are articles, position papers, summa-
ries, glossary articles and a bibliographic database
•	 Articles: we will show how the design of the dy-
namically generated site allows different views to 
be generated from the raw XML to PDF 
•	 Bibliographic database: we will discuss the issues 
around maintaining a central bibliographic database 
that is changed as papers are submitted and encoded
Digital humanists can probably imagine how we built 
this, but we need to review the structure of the proj-
ect to understand what it is that we want to bury and 
the challenges inherent in the deposit process. Most 
of the content in the Compendium was written by par-
ticipants	 and	 submitted	 as	MS	Word	 files	 for	 editing.	
We decided early not to force contributors to learn our 
XML scheme, a scheme which was developed through 
a consultation process based on the TEI guidelines. The 
editor and assistants carried out the encoding which 
also allowed us to add consistent links, especially for 
glossary articles of which there are over 200. We also 
used a custom search and replace batch tool to update 
the links regularly as we got more glossary entries. 
 
The	TEI	XML	files	were	parsed,	verified,	and	processed	
when uploaded through the administrative interface. 
Metadata was extracted for the databases to generate 
tables	of	content	dynamically	and	the	files	were	indexed	
for searching. Bibliographic entries were the one form of 
content entered directly through a web interface. At an 
early	 stage,	we	 identified	 the	 challenge	of	 synchroniz-
ing a single bibliographic database for the project with 
all the bibliographies in the individual position papers, 
articles and glossary entries as they were submitted. As 
documents were submitted, the vagaries of individual 
authorial preferences, not unexpectedly, led to slightly 
different information for the same reference. We needed 
a way to normalize the bibliographies. What we con-
structed	may	seem	Byzantine	at	first,	but	through	appli-
cation you will see how it makes sense.
1. When an editor encodes the bibliography of an arti-
cle	she	doesn’t	do	it	in	the	XML	file.	She	enters	any	
new records into the online database and checks any 
entries that already exist against the existing record. 
2. If there is a discrepancy she follows it up and cor-
rects the database entry if needed. 
3. Once an entry is checked in the database she gener-
ates a stub tag with a key that corresponds to the 
database	record.	That	is	put	into	the	XML	file	for	the	
article rather than a full record. 
4. When the XML version of the article is uploaded 
to the Compendium the system replaces the stubs 
with a full TEI <bibl> entry from the database. 
Thus each article has a full bibliography marked up 
in XML at the end should we deposit the articles 
independently of the bibliographic database. The 
Compendium project team felt this was important 
because	 they	 didn’t	want	 their	writings	 dependent	
on other data for completeness. 
5. In the uploading we also keep online all the XML 
files	with	just	the	stubs.	This	allows	us	to	periodical-
ly rerun the process that adds the full bibliography 
and	replaces	the	full	XML	files	thereby	eliminating	
any inconsistencies that might occur as we correct 
entries over time. In effect we regenerate the content 
on a regular basis. 
The Compendium itself in order to be experienced there-
fore is a system with the following components:
•	 XML	files	of	the	content	
•	 A MySQL bibliographic database 
•	 A metadata database of the content for generating 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 228
pages and for searching 
•	 A full text index for searching the text 
•	 The code that handles the dynamic generation of the 
site, the searching, linking and the XSL transforms. 
•	 Some HTML pages, and CSS stylesheets 
•	 And various images that are embedded in pages. 
Depositing What? 
The	XML	files	are	not	the	site,	and	therein	lies	the	prob-
lem of burying the whole Compendium. The experi-
ence of the Compendium is not only in the individual 
articles, or even in the bibliographic data – it is in the 
interaction between these mediated by the code and in 
the user experience. The glossary is a prime example 
– the meaning is not just in the text of entries, but in 
the searchable whole and web linking articles to others. 
At the start we thought it would be trivial to deposit the 
Compendium. We promised that we would encode the 
content following TEI guidelines and then deposit it at 
the Oxford Text Archives and other similar digital ar-
chives, but of course, the XML is not the Compendium. 
The Compendium is a work of its own that is more than 
the	sum	of	the	XML	files.	How	do	we	deposit	a	system? 
 
Why do we make such a big deal about ending the 
project and what exactly is the problem? The simple 
answer is that the funding body requires projects to 
deposit their research data. To quote from the SSHRC 
Research Data Archiving Policy, “All research data col-
lected with the use of SSHRC funds must be preserved 
and made available for use by others within a reasonable 
period of time.”  If you accept the research funds you 
are obligated to do so, even though in a survey SSHRC 
conducted as part of the National Research Data Ar-
chive Consultation they discovered that very few had. 
 
Another answer is that this is what we should do. Proj-
ects should be designed from the beginning to die grace-
fully leaving as a legacy the research data developed in 
a form usable in the future. That is what scholarly en-
coding following best practice guidelines like the TEI 
is about – encoding your data so that others can un-
derstand the decisions and be able to reuse it. We are 
fooling ourselves if we think projects will survive over 
time as living, well maintained projects. Ask yourself 
how many projects you have buried without a service. 
 
SSHRC provides some of the reasons for archival de-
posit:
Sharing data strengthens our collective capacity to meet 
academic standards of openness by providing opportuni-
ties	to	further	analyze,	replicate,	verify	and	refine	research	
findings.	 Such	 opportunities	 enhance	 progress	 within	
fields	of	research	as	well	as	support	the	expansion	of	in-
ter-disciplinary research. In addition, greater availability 
of research data will contribute to improved training for 
graduate and undergraduate students, and, through the 
secondary	analysis	of	existing	data,	make	possible	signifi-
cant economies of scale. Finally, researchers whose work 
is publicly funded have a special obligation to openness 
and accountability. [3]
They	don’t	say	it	explicitly,	but	one	reason	to	deposit	is	
that our research itself is of its time and grist for the mill 
of future researchers who may want to study us. Funders 
expects us to be open so that others can study the re-
search process once we are dead, buried and history – a 
rather sobering prospect, but one of the features of an 
emerging philosophy of open research that advocates 
for exposing the research process rather than hiding the 
mess behind authoritative results.
Depositing the Compendium 
The challenge then is determining what exactly are we 
to deposit and where? We conducted an environmental 
scan to attempt to identify best practices and ascertain 
what others have been doing to address this digital proj-
ect archival challenge. Our research and recommenda-
tions were compiled and made available publicly on 
the TADA (Text Analysis Developers Association) 
wiki. [2] We should however warn that like all wikis 
this is a working document that was written during the 
process and has numerous dead ends or rough notes. 
 
We	identified	the	following	separate	types	of	knowledge	
that we might try to deposit:
•	 Content – this is the obvious one – the original 
research articles encoded in XML and other docu-
ments created by the project. 
•	 Code	–	also	obvious,	but	difficult.	Why	do	it?	Be-
cause in the code lies the interactivity and interface. 
This includes the XSLT code that generates the in-
terface. The point, however, is that only with the 
code could one recreate the site as a dynamic site. 
•	 Process – this is even less obvious, but the Com-
pendium is the result of various research, program-
ming and editorial processes, many of which are 
documented in instructions to authors and cod-
ers and other administrative documents, including 
documentation around the deposit process itself like 
the wiki mentioned. The process whereby we han-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  229
dle synchronizing bibliographic entries is a case in 
point	–	it	made	a	difference	to	the	content	and	isn’t	
apparent	in	the	final	XML	files	which	hide	the	pro-
cess. These materials document the Compendium as 
a collaborative writing project. 
•	 The Interactive Experience – ultimately, for rea-
sons that will be clear below, we also document 
and deposit information about the experience of 
the Compendium as an interactive work so that a 
future user could imagine what it was like to use 
the Compendium online. We chose to document this 
with a narrative with screen shots of typical use of 
the Compendium. 
The Solution 
So what was the recommended solution?
1. First, we decided to deposit these four components 
separately – content, code, process, and experience, 
each	in	the	best	format	we	can	find.	This	is	easy	for	
the content, we designed it from the start in XML 
which is, to a certain extent, self-documenting, but 
in the case of code it is less clear. 
2. All	the	materials	are	output	to	a	flat-file	format,	by	
which I mean that things like the bibliographic data-
base will be output to XML. The code is comment-
ed so that it could be compiled and documentation 
generated in HTML or XML in an industry standard 
fashion, although we must note, these standards 
are for documentation, not preservation. The point 
is that the documentation will be embedded in the 
code and could be extracted to produce documenta-
tion assuming that future computer scientists recog-
nize how to extract documentation. 
3. We are also creating “READ-ME” documents de-
scribing the environment and arrangement needed 
to run the code. We realize this means we are not 
depositing a working system that someone could 
download, install, and run to recreate the Compen-
dium. The databases are not being stored in their 
native format, they will have to be regenerated and 
we	are	not	creating	a	compressed	file	of	the	whole	
site. Instead we are trying to deposit something that 
could be used to reliably recreate the current Com-
pendium. The reason for this is simple, over the 
long term the chances that someone can recreate the 
hardware and software platform on which an instal-
lation could work will approach zero. Therefore, we 
are better off providing something that can be un-
derstood and reprogrammed, if needed, than some-
thing	that	can’t	be	install	anyway.	A	further	reason	
is, as noted above, that the purpose of depositing is 
not only so people can recreate the original site, but 
also so they can study the Compendium and reuse it 
in unanticipated ways. 
4. I should add that we also not trying to deposit some-
thing in a form that the interactivity could be main-
tained. There are models for preserving interactive 
objects so that they can be easily run on emulators. 
The most obvious is to move all the interactivity 
into XSL or other XML standards for interactive 
processing like SMIL. The reason we are not going 
that	route	is	that	it	is	too	expensive,	probably	won’t	
capture all of the interactivity, and we have little 
confidence	in	any	of	the	candidate	standards.	Does	
anyone remember HyTime? It was supposed to do 
for hypermedia what the TEI did for texts. Instead 
we are depositing a description with screen shots 
of the experience of using the Compendium so that 
someone who also had the code and content could at 
the very least understand the experience, and if they 
chose to reimplement our code they could recreate 
the experience. 
5. Third, we will deposit the materials in multiple 
forms including a printout on archival grade paper, 
multiple copies of archival grade CDs or DVDs, and 
direct data deposit to online depositories. 
6. Fourth, we will deposit the materials at multiple 
depositories from the McMaster University Library 
to the National Library of Canada which is in the 
process of implementing the National Data Archive 
Consultation reports. 
We believe that by depositing in multiple forms, in mul-
tiple locations, and with rich documentation of the pro-
cess and experience we will have buried the Compen-
dium in suitable open casket, ready for reanimation or 
reuse. Let the worms loose. [4]
Conclusion 
This brings us back to graceful ends. There are other 
ends to the Compendium than its deposit. One end, that 
is not in the scope of this paper, but may be of inter-
est is managing the review of the Compendium so that 
those of us who worked on the digital design, but are not 
published in the book series are recognized. When the 
project negotiated with publishers for the print volumes, 
one reason we selected UBC Press was that they agreed 
to conduct a peer review of the Compendium along with 
the print series. We often talk about how digital work 
isn’t	reviewed,	which	causes	trouble	in	the	academy,	but	
in this case the Compendium was reviewed and, in ef-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 230
fect, accepted for publication as a companion to the print 
series. We therefore have an obligation to the Press to 
deposit the Compendium, an unanticipated side-effect. 
 
The end of a project is not the death of the research. It 
is tempting to try to extend the life of a project beyond 
its initial funding as online materials can be so easily 
updated	and	added	to.	We	suspect	many	projects	don’t	
deposit their work because there is always more to be 
done and the possibility of another grant. The result can 
be a long and drawn out death where nothing is saved be-
cause any day the project could be brought back to life. 
We have found it strangely liberating to run a process of 
deposit and believe it can actually release the research to 
imagine new projects. What is missing is stories about 
how you can reasonably deposit a project even if you 
intend to continue the research. We will conclude by 
briefly	describing	how	the	Compendium	is	the	seed	for	
a Global Globalization Research Dialogue project that is 
proposing to build a social network of researchers that 
includes researchers in countries affected by globaliza-
tion, but excluded from research circles. Burying the 
Compendium allows us to imagine a new project with 
a life of its own.
Notes 
[1] See www.globalautonomy.ca for the Globaliza-
tion Compendium and details about the project. 
 
[2] This deposit process is openly document-
ed at Archiving the Compendium, http://tada.
m c m a s t e r. c a / v i e w / M a i n / P r o b l e m O v e r v i e w 
 
[3] See the SSHRC Research Data Archiving Policy at 
http://www.sshrc.ca/web/apply/policies/edata_e.asp 
 
[4] It should be noted that at the time of writing this pro-
posal we have not completed the process, but anticipate 
that	the	final	deposit	will	take	place	assuming	our	part-
ners like the National Library have suitable depositories 
in place in time. We note, however, that when you search 
for depositories, there are precious few in operation. The 
Oxford Text Archive, for example, seems to no longer 
take submissions.
