Chasing the Ghosts of Ibsen: A 
computational stylistic analysis 
of drama in translation 
Gerard Lynch
Trinity College, Dublin
gplynch@tcd.ie
 
Carl Vogel
Trinity College, Dublin 
vogel@tcd.ie	
1 Introduction 
Research into the stylistic properties of translations is an issue which has received some attention in com-
putational stylistics. Previous work by Rybicki (2006) 
on the distinguishing of character idiolects in the work of 
Polish author Henryk Sienkiewicz and two correspond-
ing	 English	 translations	 using	 Burrow’s	Delta	method	
concluded that idiolectal differences could be observed 
in the source texts and this variation was preserved to a 
large degree in both translations. This study also found 
that the two translations were also highly distinguishable 
from one another. 
Burrows (2002) examined English translations of Juve-
nal also using the Delta method, results of this work sug-
gest that some translators are more adept at concealing 
their own style when translating the works of another 
author whereas other authors tend to imprint their own 
style to a greater extent on the work they translate. 
Our work examines the writing of a single author, Nor-
wegian playwright Hen rik Ibsen, and these writings 
translated into both German and English from Nor-
wegian, in an attempt to investigate the preservation of 
characterization,	 defined	 here	 as	 the	 distinctiveness	 of	
textual contributions of characters. 
2 Background 
Many studies in computational stylistics have focused on 
tasks which are related to those of authorship attribution 
but are not concerned with the notion of at tributing au-
thorship to texts of unknown provenance. A related area 
of study is the idea of pastiche, an intended imitation of 
an	author’s	style	in	the	same	language,	which	contrasts	
with translation as an intended imitation of an au thors 
style but in a different language. Somers and Tweedie 
(2003) conducted experiments involving pastiche, the 
author in question was Lewis Carroll and the pastiche 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  193
was	a	modern	children’s	fable	written	by	Gilbert	Adair	
called Al ice through the Needle’s Eye in which the author 
attempted to imitate the style of Carroll in such works 
as Through the Looking Glass and Alice’s Adventures 
in Wonderland. Various techniques used in authorship 
attribution were used in the task, including methods of 
lexical richness, principal component analysis, the cu-
sum technique1, and others. Some methods distinguished 
the pastiche from the original and some did not. Somers 
and Tweedie (2003) conclude as follows: If a pastiche 
is indistinguishable from the original by an authorship 
attribution method, can it be said that the pastiche is in 
fact a perfect imitation of the orig inal, or is it the case 
flawed?	In	the	case	of	translation	which	is	of	relevance	to	
our current work, the question can be formulated in a dif-
ferent way: If a trans lation is highly similar stylistically 
to other works by the same translator, is the translation 
a faithful one? 
This current study builds on previous work detecting 
character voices in the poetry of Irish poet Brendan Ken-
nelly by Vogel and Brisset (2007) and a study on char-
acterization in playwrights by Vogel and Lynch (2008). 
These studies were concerned with the language used by 
authors in the creation of character. The tools used in this 
study were used in these previous studies. 
3 Experimental Setup 
For these experiments, three works by Henrik Ibsen were 
used, A Doll’s House (1879) Ghosts (1881), and The 
Master Builder (1892)2 . The electronic versions of these 
plays were obtained from Ibsen.net3 and Project Guten-
berg. The contri butions of each character are extracted 
using PlayParser4 . All stage instructions are discarded in 
this step, leaving only the remaining character dialogue. 
The method decomposes all texts associated with a cat-
egory (here, persona or play) into chunks of equal size. 
Pairwise similarity metrics are computed for all chunks. 
The metric is just the average chi-square computation of 
the	difference	 in	distri	bution	between	pairs	of	files	 for	
each	token	appearing	in	either	file.	Different	sorts	of	to-
kenization capture different linguistic features for which 
one might consider distributions within and across text 
categories. If the pairwise similarity scores are rank or-
dered, then one can exploit the intuitions that a homo-
geneous cate gory will have a smaller rank-sum than a 
heterogeneous one, and that arbitrary samples from a 
homogeneous category should be more like the rest of 
that cat egory than alternative categories. The method 
also provides a way to measure degree of homogene-
ity, the number of samples who are more like the rest of 
the category can be measured against a baseline creating 
by random sampling. See Vogel and Lynch (2008) for a 
more detailed account of the method. 
4 Experiments 
4.1 First Experiment  
The	first	experiment	seeks	to	compare	character	homo-
geneity over different lan guages. The second experi-
ment compares two different translations of the same 
play in order to quantify similarity between parallel 
translations. Table 1 shows the plays and their respec-
tive	 translators.	As	mentioned,	 the	first	10k	of	 text	per	
character was examined and this was split into 5 sec-
tions. Thus, the criteria for inclusion in the study 
was that the character should contain at least 10k of 
text and 11 characters were examined, as detailed in 
Table 2. Only the version of Ghosts translated by Ar-
cher	 is	used	 in	 the	first	experiment.	The	results	named	
in	the	next	section	have	statistical	significance.	  
 
Play Language Translator
Gespenster (Ghosts) German Sigurd Ibsen
Ein Puppenhaus (A Doll’s 
House)
German Marie Von Borch
Baumeister Solness (The 
Master Builder)
German Marie Von Borch
The Master Builder English William Archer & 
Edmund Gosse
A	Doll’s	House English William Archer
Ghosts English William Archer
Ghosts English R Farquarson 
Sharp
Table 1: Plays and Translators 
The	results	for	the	first	experiment	showed	that	character	
homogeneity varies to some extent over the translations, 
the character idiolects are not necessarily preserved to 
the same degree as the originals. When letter frequencies 
are mea sured, the Norwegian original language charac-
ters prove to be more homogeneous than the translations, 
examples include the character of Engstrand who is ho-
mogeneous in English and Norwegian but not German, 
however, one character whose language remains distinct 
across all of the translations is Nora, the hero ine from A 
Doll’s House and one of the typical strong female char-
acters	found	in	Ibsen’s	drama.5 However, when the play 
is	taken	as	the	category,	we	find	that	the	chunks	of	perso-
nas from each play are more similar to the personas from 
the same play than from different plays, and this is con-
sistent across languages. So while within character ho-
mogeneity is not always preserved, the homogeneity of 
the plays remains relatively consistent across languages. 
5 The Second Experiment 
The second experiment sought to examine whether two 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 194
translations of the same original text into the same lan-
guage are distinguishable by translator as in the work 
by Rybicki which delineated the work by each, while 
observing the preserva tion of idiolect in each. The ex-
perimental	setup	was	similar	to	the	first	experiment	with	
the	character	contributions	separated	and	split	 into	five	
files	each.	This	 time,	however,	 the	characters	 from	 the	
two translations of Ghosts by William Archer and Robert 
Farquharson Sharp were compared with each other. 
Our	findings	were	that	the	characters	from	Archer’s	trans-
lation were more homogeneous in general than those of 
Sharp’s	 translation.	 Of	 the	 characters	 which	 were	 not	
homogeneous, the text segments were more similar to 
the segments of the same character by the correspond-
ing author than any other writings by the same author. 
Sharp’s	characters	tended	to	be	more	similar	to	the	cor-
responding Archer character more often than vice versa. 
This suggests that both authors have managed to perform 
faithful	translations	which	are	not	highly	influenced	by	
their own writing style. It also suggests that Sharp may 
have	used	Ibsen’s	translation	as	a	reference	when	craft-
ing his own.
Character Play
Engstrand Ghosts
Pastor Manders Ghosts
Oswald Ghosts
Mrs Alving Ghosts
Helmer A Dolls House
Krogstad A Dolls House
MrsLinde A Dolls House
Nora A Dolls House
Aline The Master Builder
Hilde The Master Builder
Solness The Master Builder
Table 2: Characters and their plays  
This result contrasts with Rybicki (2006) who found that 
the two transla tions of Sienkiewicz separated cleanly 
from one another with a preservation of individual char-
acter idiolects. However, Rybicki makes clear that the 
two English translations were done almost one hundred 
years	 apart	 with	 the	 second	 translator	 taking	 specific	
steps to bring the language of Sienkiewicz into the 20th 
century. Also, we are aware that results between the 
studies of two different authors are not directly compa-
rable	and	do	not	seek	to	draw	definite	parallels,	merely	to	
reflect	on	related	work	in	the	same	sphere.
6
 
6 Conclusion 
In this research, character idiolects in translation have 
been examined. Future work will involve using different 
metrics for comparison along with comparing different 
selections of text from the characters considered, along 
with the com parisons of translations of different authors 
by the same translator. 
Notes 
1See Farringdon (1996) for a detailed explanation of the 
origins of this technique, including detailed examples of 
the	method’s	use	in	a	legal	setting.	
2For the English versions of the plays, the print versions 
are collected in Ibsen, Archer, Aveling, Archer, and Ar-
cher	(1890),	Sharp’s	translations	can	be	found	in	Sharp	
(1911), the collected works of Ibsen in German are to 
be found in Ibsen (1898) and the Norwegian collected 
works are found in Ibsen and Bull (1957) 
3http://www.ibsen.net,	last	verified	March	12,	2009,	con-
tains	comprehensive	information	about	Ibsen’s	life	and	
work together with links to his plays in the original form 
and in transla tion. 
4A Java based tool designed for this purpose, Lynch and 
Vogel (2007), describes the creation and benchmarking 
of this particular program. 
5Hedda Gabler being the other one who springs to mind, 
further studies may incorporate a wider range of plays 
and characters. 
6It is not fully clear from any forewords to the e-texts 
when	exactly	the	translations	them	selves	were	first	pub-
lished,	however	it	does	state	that	the	first	performance	in	
English	was	in	1890,	using	Archers	translation,	Sharp’s	
translations	were	 first	 published	 in	 1911,	 according	 to	
http://www.leicestersecularsociety.org.uk/library_shelf.
htm,	last	verified	March	12,	2009	
References 
Burrows, J. (2002). The Englishing of Juvenal: Com-
putational Stylistics and Translated Texts. Style, 36 (4), 
677–699. 
Farringdon, J. (1996). Analysing for Authorship: A guide 
to the Cusum technique. University of Wales Press. 
Ibsen, H. (1898). Henrik Ibsens sämtliche Werke in 
deutscher Sprache. S. Fischer. 
Ibsen, H., Archer, W., Aveling, E., Archer, F., & Archer, 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  195
C. (1890). Ibsen’s Prose Dramas. W. Scott. 
Ibsen, H. & Bull, F. (1957). Samlede verker: hundreår-
sutgave. Gyldendal. 
Lynch, G. & Vogel, C. (2007). Automatic Character As-
signation. In Proceedings of AI-2007 Twenty-seventh 
SGAI International Conference on Innovative Tech-
niques and Applications of Artificial Intelligence, pp. 
335–348. 
Rybicki, J. (2006). Burrowing into Translation: Char-
acter	 Idiolects	 in	Henryk	Sienkiewicz’s	Trilogy	and	 its	
Two English Translations. Literary and Lin guistic Com-
puting, 21 (1), 91–103. 
Sharp, R. (1911). Henrik Ibsen, Ghosts and Two Other 
Plays. J.M Dent. 
Somers, H. & Tweedie, F. (2003). Authorship Attribu-
tion and Pastiche. Com puters and the Humanities, 37 
(4), 407–429. 
Vogel, C. & Brisset, S. (2007). Hearing Voices in the 
Poetry of Brendan Kennelly. Belgian Journal of English 
Language & Literature, 1–16. 
Vogel, C. & Lynch, G. (2008). Computational Stylome-
try:	Who’s	in	a	Play?.	In	Verbal and Nonverbal Features 
of Human-Human and Human-Machine Interaction., pp. 
189–194. Springer. 
