Choreographing the Data: 
performing the ARTeFACT 
project TAKE 2
Susan L. Wiesner
University of North Carolina, Greensboro
susan_wiesner@uncg.edu
Jama S. Coartney
University of Virginia 
jsc3x@virginia.edu	
Rommie L. Stalnaker
Gainesville Ballet Company
rstalnaker81@gmail.com
Argument 
Although one might question the value of collecting and preserving artefacts for all elements surround-
ing a dance, the preservation of dance as a digitised 
performance text can become a basis for research that 
address the issues of describing and analyzing the per-
formance event, while it also enables creativity which in 
turn further supports research.
Premise 
At DH 2008 Susan L. Wiesner and Jama Coartney pre-
sented their work on the ARTeFACT project, and posited 
the previous argument, which resulted in a suggestion 
(challenge?) to create a work based on the data. As AR-
TeFACT is a multi-layered, iterative, project involving 
the contributions of many, the suggested choreography 
had already been planned as a project step. It is the 
continued work on this project in both the capture and 
preservation of movement-driven data (generated from 
one dance work) and subsequent choreography based on 
that data that is the focus of this suggested panel/perfor-
mance. 
Method 
As noted in 2008, the ARTeFACT Project Alpha includ-
ed teams of students asked to design and build an orthot-
ic device that, when worn, causes the wearer to emulate 
the challenges of walking with a physical disability. In 
lieu	of	a	final	exam,	the	students	produced	a	performance	
during which members of each group wore their devices 
and moved through the space according to ‘choreogra-
phy’	set	by	their	peers.	Two	cameras	preserved	the	per-
formance itself.
Inspired by the concept of the devices, a choreographer 
used the collection of artefacts from the engineering 
students’	 course-work	 to	 develop	 a	 dance	 work,	 For 
Natalie, which became ARTeFACT Project Beta. In ad-
dition to her study of the digital artefacts generated by 
the engineering class students, the choreographer used 
the devices themselves (actually wearing them to cho-
reograph). This forced her to work within the limitations 
of the devices, inhibiting her level of abstraction, thus 
causing her to choose movement similar to those of the 
students, especially in the case of the Ricketts device. 
Using	Rudolph	Laban’s	Effort/Shapei concepts, she also 
analysed her choreography to create a more cohesive 
movement vocabulary. Her work was preserved through 
still photographs, two static and mobile video cameras, 
and motion capture devices (wiimotes). These wiimotes 
were	 placed	 on	 the	 dancers’	 bodies,	 and	 data	 signals	
were captured using an interactive authoring program, 
Max MSP/Jitter. The resultant data, 57,326 samples with 
229,304 descriptive elements, was exported as plain text 
and can be viewed in a custom playback engine or any 
application	that	reads	plain	text	files.
Photos L to R: Ricketts device; choreographic idea; 
movement abstraction
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  295
Data samples generated by sensor on left calf (from 
movement abstraction) 
From the data, a third work, For Always, is being cho-
reographed (completion date December 2008) using 
Laban’s	 Eukinetics	 (Effort/Shape)	 theories.	 The	 same	
preservation techniques will be used against this work in 
order	to	find	the	traces	between	movement	(through	es-
tablished methods of movement analysis such as Laban 
and	Adshead’s	qualitative	approaches)	and	quantitative	
analysis of the data samples including the relative place-
ment of the capture devices. 
Conclusion
The panel/performance proposed herein considers the 
processes of iterative choreography and the inclusion of 
digital technologies into the choreographic process, the 
performance event, and the preservation of both. It will 
also discuss the possibilities generated by technologies 
themselves (towards methods of controlled vocabular-
ies based on movement and/or automated, feature-based 
tagging). The discussion will culminate in a multi-media 
dance	 performance,	 and	 an	 ‘after-performance’	 work-
shop and Q/A. Thus it is requested that the panel/perfor-
mance be scheduled for at least 90-minute slot. The pan-
el includes: Jama Coartney, Head of the Digital Media 
Lab at UVA (originator of the project, who will speak to 
the technologies and data comparisons); Rommie Stal-
naker, Project Beta choreographer (to present her cho-
reographic processes and movement analysis), and Su-
san L. Wiesner, Project Gamma choreographer (to offer 
a theoretical analysis of the traces and her choreographic 
processes).
Sample Bibliography 
Adshead-Lansdale, J. (ed.) 1999, Dancing Texts: inter-
textuality and interpretation. London: Dance Books. 
Dell, Cecily 1977, A Primer for Movement Description: 
Using Effort-Shape and Supplementary Concepts. New 
York: Dance Notation Bureau Press. 
Goellner, E. W. & Murphy, J. S. 1995, Bodies of the Text. 
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 
Kholief, M., Maly, K. & Shen, S. 2003, ‘Event-Based 
Retrieval from a Digital Library containing Medi-
cal	 Streams’	 in	 Proceedings of the 2003 Joint Con-
ference on Digital Libraries (Online) Available at 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/Xplore/login.jsp?url=/
iel5/8569/27127/01204867.pdf 
Naugle, L. 2001,‘Reinterpreting Choreography: Motion 
Capture	 Data	 as	 Historical	 Information’	 in	 Society of 
Dance History Scholars Proceedings 2001 24th Confer-
ence, Birmingham: SDHS. 
New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, Je-
rome Robbins Dance Division 2005, Report from Work-
ing Group 4 Dance Documentation Needs Analysis 
Meeting 2.
Note
iEffort is “how the body concentrates its exertion” (Dell 
1977, 10). The elements of Effort are: “direct and in-
direct, light and strong, quick and sustained, free and 
bound” (Ibid.). Shape is “how the body forms itself in 
space” (Dell 1977, 42). Its elements are: “spreading and 
enclosing, rising and sinking, growing and shrinking, ad-
vancing and retreating”, as well as movement that goes 
“sideward out and sideward across, upward and down-
ward, growing and shrinking, forward and backward”. 
Laban’s	explanation	of	Shape	not	only	describes	move-
ments within the body (the personal Kinesphere), but 
can also be used to describe movement that traverses the 
stage space (pathways).
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 296
