Collective Culture and 
Visualization of Spatiotemporal 
Information
Shinya Saito 
Ritsumeikan University 
saitos@fc.ritsumei.ac.jp
Shin Ohno 
Ritsumeikan University 
ohnoshin@gmail.com
Mitsuyuki Inaba
Ritsumeikan University 
inabam@sps.ritsumei.ac.jp
Introduction
Archiving with digital technology is indispensable for historical cultural heritage items, but we also 
have to apply this technology for culture that remains 
difficult	 to	 form	and	store.	This	paper	will	argue	 three	
important aspects of archiving regional culture, its rep-
resentation, sharing, and analysis. Then, in order to deal 
with these aspects, we will introduce the environment 
KACHINA-CUBE (KC) which we are developing and 
evaluate	findings	 of	 its	 application.	We	will	 start	with	
elaborating its design concept, then architecture and ap-
plication, referring to its related works.
Design Concept
In order to design KC as a tool for archiving regional 
culture, we see the following three aspects important, 
thus take them into consideration. 
Fig. 1 Three levels of cultural representation
Representation Aspect  
Developing Valsiner’s concept of culture (Valsiner, 
2007), we argue that cultural representations appear in 
three levels; personal, collective, and public (See Fig. 1). 
The first, personal culture consists of personal memory 
and knowledge. The second level of collective culture 
can be considered collection of personal cultures. The 
third level of public culture is public information, pub-
licly recognized and found in textbooks and dictionaries. 
Public culture is well preserved. Because of complexity 
and ambiguity of personal and collective cultures, how-
ever, researchers are still struggling with how to preserve 
these two, which should be understood by putting them 
in their socio-cultural contexts. Taking a socio-cultural 
approach, Wertsch (1998) advocates to treat narratives 
as artifacts, the key to represent culture.
Sharing Aspect  
W3C puts tremendous efforts to create standardized 
frameworks for Web, and researchers in digital humani-
ties regard semantic web technology as one of the key 
research	fields.	This	kind	of	technology	gives	us	various	
chances to share data for other use. We believe archived 
cultural	data	should	be	standardized	to	fit	in	this	frame-
work, which allows users to access data and utilize them 
in various platforms.
Analytical Aspect  
To	research	history	and	culture	in	a	specific	region,	oral	
history plays an important role to make us understand 
them.	Collection	of	oral	history	in	a	specific	area	reveals	
what kind of life experience people had and/or have in 
the area, their similarities and differences.
Valsinar and Sato (2006) propose the concept of Tra-
jectory Equifinality Model (TEM) as a framework to 
analyze personal experience which suggests diverse and 
possible trajectories based on three concepts: Bifurca-
tion Point (BFP), Obligatory Passage Point (OPP), and 
Equifinality Point (EFP). BFP is a point of each person’s 
behavior branching or forking into new types of behav-
ior by his or her choice. OPP means, literally, Obliga-
tory Passage Point which most of the people have to go 
through because of their own logic, institutions, and cus-
toms. EFP is defined as the final state that individuals 
equally reach from different initial conditions. Focusing 
on OPP and EFP to investigates cultural recognition that 
people in a particular region share, this paper describes 
the KC system that assists users to seek through multiple 
narratives and identify OPP/EFP in construction of the 
regional culture.
Architecture
Giving consideration into these three aspects, we have 
been developing KC system. As for the representation 
aspect, we accept Wertsch’s propose and design the soft-
ware to hold data of spatiotemporal information.
We decided to design KC in three dimensions, two di-
mensions for geographical information and another 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  249
one for temporal information. In this virtual 3D space 
(CUBE model) (see Fig. 2), users can post formal and 
informal story fragments. Among them, we call formal 
ones history fragments, and informal fragments story 
ones. KC also supports researchers to make linkages 
among fragments in periodical or logical order. We call a 
set of cultural fragments storyline.
As for the sharing aspect, we apply RDF/OWL to define 
our data.  Its extensive and flexible definition is suitable 
for our system and motivates other researchers to access 
our data (Bray, 2001). We defined the data format as fol-
lows:
Fig. 2 Image of CUBE model
1. History fragment class:  Objective information in 
textbook or dictionary
2. Story fragment class:  Subjective information such 
as oral history
3. Storyline class:  Aggregate of historical and story 
fragments	based	on	a	specific	context
4. Geography class:  Geographical information of the 
historical and story fragments
5. Temporal class:  Time when the incidents told in 
historical and story fragments occurred
Finally, the analytical aspect, KC implements the func-
tion of OPP/EFP detector. OPP/EFP detector searches 
fragments occurred in similar places or time. Using 
OPP/EFP detector makes it possible to learn spatiotem-
poral possibilities. This is the implementation of Sato’s 
concept, and to understand a region in meta level, this 
feature can be a strong analytical tool.
Application
As a test case, we applied the data of movie culture in 
Kyoto Rakusai Area, a.k.a. Japan’s Hollywood, to our 
system. We used oral history data collected by Tomita 
and Itakura (2001). Each story that has spatial and/or 
temporal information is stored to the system. Currently 
we have oral history data from three storytellers who had 
involved in movie industries in the area from 1910’s to 
1930’s. In terms of the representation aspect, the story 
fragments were well mapped on the 3D space, with their 
spatiotemporal information. Using our storyline repre-
sentation visualizes connections among independent 
fragments. As for the sharing aspect, we are still work-
ing	on	definition	of	the	data,	hoping	that	this	feature	will	
be available soon.  As for the analytical aspect, OPP/EFP 
detector	displays	different	storytellers’	worlds	with	pos-
sible alternatives experiences (see Fig. 3).
Fig. 3 Display of OPP/EFP detector
Conclusions
In this paper, we argue importance of not only archiving 
collective culture but also standardized semantic Web as 
a socio-cultural analytical tool which allows research-
ers to access data and utilize them in various platforms. 
Based on this argument, we developed KC, applying it 
to actual research. As a result, our system demonstrates a 
lot	of	potentials	for	research	in	various	fields,	which	we	
have to prove by developing further this software with 
applications, as well as examining it in more case studies 
of collective culture.
There are well-known research projects and Web sys-
tems to deal with spatiotemporal information. For ex-
ample, the TimeMap Project in the University of Sydney 
develops Web GIS that can visualize chronological data 
and animate historical maps (Johnson, 2004). The SIMI-
LE Project in the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
develops the TimeLine system that can organize text and 
pictorial data in chronological order. Our KACHINA 
CUBE is significantly different from these previous Web 
systems in the following two points:
1. Adoption of CUBE model (3D viewer that com-
bined map with timeline); and
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 250
2. Implementation of user interface suitable to contain 
narratives and oral histories
With KC, therefore, we hope to contribute to further 
development of regional archive system and digital hu-
manities in general.
References
Bray, T. (2001). What is RDF?. http://www.xml.com/
pub/a/2001/01/24/rdf.html (accessed on 14 November, 
2008).
Tomita, M. and Itakura, F. (2001). Voices from Kyoto: 
Interview	with	ITO	Asako	–	An	aspect	of	Japanese	film	
history. Art Research. 1(1): 127-138. 
Valsiner, J. (2007). PERSONAL CULTURE AND 
CONDUCT OF VALUE, Journal of Social, Evolution-
ary, and Cultural Psychology. 1(2): 59-65.
Valsiner, J. and Sato, T. (2006).Historically Structured 
Sampling	 (HSS):	How	 can	 psychology’s	methodology	
become tuned in to the reality of the historical nature of 
cultural psychology? In Straub, J. Et.al. (eds.)  Pursuit of 
meaning. Advances in cultural and cross-cultural psy-
chology.  Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag, pp.215-251.
Wertsch, J. V. (1998). Mind As Action. NewYork: Ox-
ford University Press.
Johnson, I. (2004). Putting Time on the Map: Using 
TimeMap for Map Animation and Web Delivery, Geo-
Informatics.
SIMILE TimeLine. http://simile.mit.edu/timeline/ (ac-
cessed on 14 March, 2009).
