Computer-Aided Palaeography, 
Present and Future 
Peter Stokes 
University of Cambridge  
pas53@cam.ac.uk.	
The	field	of	digital	palaeography	has	received	increas-ing attention in recent years (Ciula 2005; Bulacu and 
Schomaker 2007; Stokes 2007/8; Rehbein et al. forth-
coming). However, this sub discipline is not generally 
accepted by the wider humanities community, and in-
deed some have argued that handwriting is inherently 
unquantifiable	and	cannot	be	analysed	by	digital	means	
(Costamagna et al. 1995–96). This paper therefore asks 
what problems might be amenable to digital analysis and 
why existing methods have not been widely accepted, 
and then introduces new software designed to address 
these issues. 
Present Issues in ‘Traditional’ 
Palaeography 
One	of	the	principle	difficulties	in	palaeography	is	sub-
jectivity, since palaeographers often express qualitative 
opinions rather than objective arguments and this can 
lead	 to	 an	 ‘authoritarian	 discipline’	which	 depends	 on	
‘the	authority	of	the	author	and	the	faith	of	the	reader’	
(Derolez	 2003).	Attempts	 to	 make	 the	 field	 more	 sci-
entific	began	well	before	the	use	of	computers,	 includ-
ing an attempt to measure hundreds of letters by hand 
(Gilissen 1973), but these were laborious and problem-
atic and the approach was largely forgotten. Others have 
drawn on forensic document analysis, since forensic 
document	analysts	have	had	to	demonstrate	the	efficacy	
and objectivity of their methods in court and are there-
fore far ahead of palaeographers in this respect (Srihari 
et al. 2002; Davis 2007). Nevertheless, the differences 
between	modern	and	medieval	handwriting	are	signifi-
cant. Amongst other things, medieval scribes were (usu-
ally) highly trained and can show very little variety from 
one scribe to the next, unlike modern writers; forensic 
analysts can generally collect a large corpus of known 
handwriting whereas palaeographers often have few or 
no known examples; and palaeographers cannot verify 
their results with the certainty that forensic analysts can 
often achieve. 
In addition to these problems, palaeographical study 
has also been hampered by the lack of an established 
terminology, and this makes commmunicating argu-
ments	very	difficult	indeed.	The	Comité international de 
paléographie latine (CIPL) was founded in 1953 partly 
for this reason but, despite sixteen international meetings 
to date, it is nowhere near producing an accepted solu-
tion (but see Muzerelle 2003). However, the problem 
is receiving more attention with the increasing use of 
databases and online catalogues. Attempts to computer-
ise existing catalogues have revealed inconsistencies in 
earlier sources, and the absence of accepted terminology 
has	made	digital	resources	difficult	to	search	and	almost	
impossible to interconnect. 
Another issue is the volume of data to be analysed. Pa-
laeographers have tended to consider small corpora of 
scribal hands, but these are not necessarily representa-
tive of wider practices, and any conclusions based on 
such samples are necessarily limited. Larger corpora are 
beyond traditional methods, however, since they can in-
clude hundreds of scribal hands with potentially thou-
sands or tens of thousands of features (Stokes 2007/8). 
Digital methods can help, as databases and data-mining 
can both be used to manage large quantities of material. 
Similarly, if catalogues and other online resources fol-
lowed standards in describing handwriting then data can 
be pooled from many different projects. However, as 
noted above, such standards do not yet exist. 
Present Issues in ‘Digital’ Palaeography 
These	difficulties	can	all	be	addressed	to	some	extent	by	
digital methods, and new studies in ‘digital palaeogra-
phy’	are	going	some	way	towards	doing	that	(Ciula	2005;	
Bulacu and Schomaker 2007; Stokes 2007/8). However, 
promising as these seem, they have received almost no 
acceptance	and	relatively	little	interest	from	‘traditional’	
palaeographers. This is partly because the technology is 
not yet mature, and perhaps also because the attempts to 
date have generally involved small projects without the 
sustained funding or larger interdisciplinary groups that 
digital humanities often require (Pierazzo 2008). How-
ever, neither of these seems to be a complete explana-
tion, and another problem may be one of understanding 
and engagement. Even if procedures are communicated 
clearly using recognised terminology, scholars still re-
quire	a	good	understanding	of	many	complex	fields	 to	
fully appreciate and engage with the material, including 
post-graduate level probability theory, digital signal pro-
cessing, computer graphics, and more, all skills which 
cannot be expected from palaeographers. This means 
that they cannot engage meaningfully with the results 
of digital methods and that we have replaced the human 
authority with a digital one. 
Another	difficulty	is	that	all	results	should	be	reproduc-
ible	 or	 at	 least	 verifiable	 if	 any	 claim	 to	 objectivity	 is	
made. However, this is rarely done in practice. For ex-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  267
ample, most techniques for enhancing images require a 
great deal of ad hoc human intervention which cannot 
be accurately documented using most existing tools. 
Many scholars in the humanities use Adobe Photoshop 
for enhancing images (Craig-McFeely and Lock 2006), 
but Photoshop provides no easy way of recording actions 
such as colour-selection, nor is it always clear exactly 
how the proprietary algorithms work. Photoshop is un-
doubtedly useful and should not be discarded lightly, but 
the methods and tools must allow full documentation 
and reproducibility. 
The lack of standard terminology for handwriting not 
only	makes	 communication	 between	 scholars	 difficult,	
but it also makes databases of script all but impossible. 
Some less conventional approaches have been tried, 
such	as	 the	Manchester	 ‘C11’	database	 (Rumble	2005;	
Scragg et al.	2005),	but	this	particular	classification	and	
interface is very opaque and subjective, so that neither 
search criteria nor result-sets are intelligible to users. Al-
ternatives such as descriptive rather than visual criteria 
for searches have also been attempted (Stokes 2007/8), 
but	these	still	depend	on	users	understanding	a	specific	
and ad hoc	vocabulary	and	so	are	difficult	to	search	and	
are nearly impossible to integrate with other resources. 
Some Future Directions 
Perhaps the easiest problem to solve is that of documen-
tation and reproducibility, since software can be designed 
to record all operations performed and then save this 
as	a	MIX/METS	file	or	other	 standard	 format	 (Stokes,	
forthcoming). A Photoshop plugin could achieve this but 
would	be	subject	to	Adobe’s	licensing	and	the	restricted	
availability of their Software Development Kit. Instead, 
basic software for image enhancement can be developed 
relatively easily, for example with the Java Advanced 
Imaging library (JAI), and any purpose-built software to 
quantify scribal hands can (and should) reveal its algo-
rithms and log every detail of what it does. 
Regarding understanding and scholarly engagement, it 
is unreasonable to expect palaeographers to understand 
the detailed mathematics of image-processing and data-
mining, but the techniques are promising and should not 
be	discarded	lightly.	One	possibility	is	therefore	to	find	
ways of presenting the results of this software in ways 
that are intelligible to palaeographers: if the results can 
be understood then they are more likely to be accepted. 
This problem is complex, though, as data-mining often 
produces results which are not intelligible and cannot 
necessarily be articulated in an intelligible way. 
The Framework for Image Analysis 
To test some of these principles, the author of the pres-
ent paper has developed new modular and extendible 
software in Java for the analysis of scribal hands. Us-
ers can load images of handwriting and then run pro-
cesses to generate metrics for scribal hands, where each 
process implements one or more algorithms to extract 
features from images of handwriting and records both 
the process and the result. A module is also provided to 
enhance images before processing, and this can be run as 
a stand-alone application to help recover text from dam-
aged manuscripts (Stokes, forthcoming). The system can 
compare metrics generated by different processes and 
thereby measure distances between samples of writing, 
and both metrics and distances can be exported for fur-
ther study. The processes are implemented as plugins so 
that users can choose different combinations of process-
es for different situations and can also implement their 
own algorithms and exchange these to allow others to 
test their methods and reproduce their results. This al-
lows people to compare different techniques in a com-
mon framework, producing libraries of scribal hands and 
plugins as a common and documented basis for palaeo-
graphical study. 
Fig. 1: Framework for Image Analysis 
A system like this should alleviate some of the problems 
discussed above. All analysis using the framework is 
documented and reproducible, assuming that the images 
are freely accessible and that the plugins conform to the 
principles outlined above. The results provide objective 
evidence, the validity and interpretation of which can then 
be debated. The metrics and processes may or may not be 
meaningful to scholars in the humanities, depending on the 
plugins, but at least they are open to scrutiny by those who 
can and wish to do so. Indeed, it is an important question 
how the results of complex algorithms can best be presented 
to scholars in the humanities, and it may well be that the 
plugins	should	allow	both	‘computer	-friendly’	and	‘hu-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 268
man-friendly’	output,	with	the	latter	including	graphical	
or even interactive displays. Much work is still required 
here, but the system described is designed for precisely 
this sort of experimentation and thereby, one hopes, pro-
vides a useful environment in which the work can be 
done. 
Fig. 2: The Image Enhancement module. 
Manuscript page is Cambridge, Corpus Christi College 
144, 32r. Reproduced by permission of the Master and 
Fellows, Corpus Christi College Cambridge 
References 
Bulacu, M., and Schomaker, L. (2007). Automatic 
Handwriting	 Identification	 on	 Medieval	 Documents.	
Proc. of 14th Int. Conf. on Image Analysis and Process-
ing (ICIAP 2007), pp. 279–284. <http://www.ai.rug.
nl/~bulacu/iciap2007-bulacu-schomaker.pdf> 
Ciula, A. (2005). Digital Palaeography: Using the Digi-
tal Representation of Medieval Script to Support Palaeo-
graphic Analysis. Digital Medievalist 1. <http://www.
digitalmedievalist.org/journal/1.1/ciula/> 
Costamagna, G., et al. (1995 and 1996). Commentare 
Bischoff. Scrittura e Civiltà 19: 325–48 and 20:401–7. 
Craig-McFeely, J., and Lock, A. (2006). Digital Image 
Archive of Medieval Music: Digital Restoration Work-
book. Oxford: Oxford Select Specialist Catalogue Publi-
cations. <http://www.methodsnetwork.ac.uk/redist/pdf/
workbook1.pdf> 
Davis, T. (2007).	The	practice	of	Handwriting	Identifica-
tion. The Library (7th Series) 8: 251–76. 
Derolez, A. (2003). The Palaeography of Gothic Manu-
script Books. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gilissen, L. (1973). L’expertise des écritures médiévales. 
Ghent:	Éditions	scientifiques	E.	Story-Scientia.	
Muzerelle, D. (2003). Vocabulaire codicologique. 
<http://vocabulaire.irht.cnrs.fr/vocab.htm> 
Pierazzo, E. (2008). Editorial Teamwork in a Digital 
Environment: The Edition of the Correspondence of 
Giacomo Puccini. Jahrbuch für Computerphilologie 10. 
<http://computerphilologie.tu-darmstadt.de/jg08/pier-
azzo.html> 
Rumble, A. R. (2005). Palaeography, Scribal 
Identification	and	the	Study	of	Manuscript	Characteris-
tics. Care and Conservation of Manuscripts: Proceed-
ings of the 8th International Seminar, edited by G. Fel-
lows-Jensen and P. Springborg. Copenhagen: Museum 
Tusculanum Press, pp. 217–28. 
Scragg, D. G., et al. (2005). ManCASS C11 Database 
Project. <http://www.arts.manchester.ac.uk/mancass/
C11database/> 
Srihari, S. N., et al. (2002). Individuality of Handwrit-
ing. Journal of Forensic Science 47: 1–17. 
Stokes, P. A. (2007/8). Palaeography and Image-Pro-
cessing: Some Solutions and Problems. Digital Medi-
evalist 3. <http://www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/3/
stokes/> 
Stokes, P. A. (forthcoming). Recovering Anglo-Saxon 
Erasures: Some Questions, Tools and Techniques. Pa-
limpsests and the Literary Imagination of Medieval Eng-
land, edited by R. Chai-Elsholz et al. New York: Pal-
grave. 
Rehbein, M., et al., eds. (forthcoming). Kodikologie 
und Paläographie im Digitalen Zeitalter—Codicol-
ogy and Palaeography in the Digital Age.  Norderstedt: 
Books on Demand. 
All URLs last accessed 12 March 2009. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  269
