Co-Reference: A New Method to 
Solve Old Problems
 
Øyvind Eide
University of Oslo 
oyvind.eide@edd.uio.no
Introduction 
In this abstract, I will describe co-referencing as a method for information integration. This method is 
based on building blocks that have been available in an-
alogue as well as digital information systems for a long 
time. Co-reference is about connecting such building 
blocks in new ways in order to enable additional tools 
necessary for creating a functional Semantic Web for 
cultural heritage. 
The co-reference concept will be explained and related 
to other tools for information integration. Some proto-
type implementations currently being developed for use 
in storing co-reference facts is being described, along 
with theoretical work towards the so-called network of 
identity. As a conclusion, I describe how we organise our 
work	in	this	field	as	well	as	our	plans	for	the	future.	
Definition	
An example of a reference is the string “The table by the 
window,” referring to a physical object. If another sting 
“The beautiful table” is referring to the same physical 
object, the two strings are said to co-refer. 
A co-reference system will add relations directly be-
tween different references in texts. To do this, an identity 
relation has to be used. A possible identity relation for 
people could be:  
A=B iff A and B are both human beings that have 
lived or are living, and the body of A is at any time 
located at the same place in the physical room as the 
body of person B.  
Once such an identity relation is established, the co-ref-
erence	definition	is	simple:		
If string x refer to A and string y refer to B, and 
A=B, then x and y co-refer. 
Recording Co-References 
Computer software is developed to detect and disam-
biguate names and other referring strings in texts. They 
are quick and reliable, but at the cost of a high level of 
mistakes; not-detected items as well as false positives. 
Even when used on very structured data with additional 
information available to help the algorithm, such as a 
library catalogue example described in (Bennett 2006), 
the success rate in automatic data integration is far from 
acceptable: 70% hits with an error rate at almost 1%. 
Human beings, on the other hand, are more reliable. But 
they are also expensive. 
There are two different ways of solving this quality-cost 
problem. One could use the computer to create candidate 
co-references and let human beings check the results, 
possibly as a federated job by amateurs. Or one could 
try	to	find	ways	to	store	results	of	work	that	people	are	
already doing as formalised co-reference information. 
As many people working in the culture heritage sector 
detect co-references as part of their job, we do not need 
to hire new people. What we need to do is to create com-
putational and organisational systems so that they are 
able to store the facts they detect in a form usable for a 
co-reference system. 
Information about the events in which co-references 
are asserted should also be stored. We will then be in 
a position to differentiate between statements made by 
computer programs and statements made by persons, as 
well as between different persons. This enables a higher 
degree of reproducibility than what is common in many 
areas of research made on the basis of cultural heritage. 
It also provides an addressee to approach if someone lat-
er suspects that a co-reference assertion may be wrong.  
Similar approaches 
Work related to co-reference detection is common in re-
search. One example of tools used in such work today 
is thesauri. But instead of connecting the sources to one 
another, as one would do in the co-reference approach, 
each of the sources are linked to a record in the thesau-
rus. From such links to thesauri, co-references may be 
detected, but details about the event in which the source 
for the co-reference information was recorded is com-
monly not available. 
Prosopographies are closely related to co-reference 
work, but has not traditionally published full sets of co-
reference information about the names mentioned in the 
sources used. The factoid approach described by Bradley 
and Short, on the other hand, will provide information 
in a formalised way from propopographical work that is 
very close to co-reference data sets as they are described 
in this abstract: “A factoid is not a statement of fact about 
a person [...] Instead, each one records an assertion by 
a source at a particular spot about a person.” (Bradley 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 102
2005, p. 8) 
The concept of co-reference is used in corpus linguistics 
as well, in the sense that co-reference annotation is ap-
plied to text corpora (Day 2008). This is closely connect-
ed to anaphora resolution. One may say that anaphora 
resolution is a part of co-reference detection as an ana-
phor is just another referring string. 
Level 1: Inside the Organisation 
Co-reference management should be part of the over-
all information strategy in an institution. The curator, 
researcher or exhibition professional should be able to 
add information to their local system about external re-
sources co-referring with internal resources. 
Tracking down co-references have always been one of 
the practical tasks performed by researchers, conserva-
tors, librarians, and others processing information about 
real world objects described in texts. The results have 
sometimes been published, e.g. in indices or in foot-
notes.	But	most	often	it	has	been	saved	in	the	scholar’s	
head, maybe also in his notes. We should do better. We 
should enable the creation of formalised data that may 
look like this: 
ID String URL Offset
Pers2345 John http://foo.org/landregis-
ter.html#record2365
Position 5-8
Pers2345 Johannes http://bar.org/smithetal/
facs/page543.png
Rectangle 
(245,64,452,87)
The syntax of this example is not important. The infor-
mation could e.g. be expressed in RDF. The point is that 
it is expressed in a machine readable way. 
We are currently implementing a prototype co-reference 
system	 in	 which	 specific	 pieces	 of	 information	 in	 our	
databases can be connected to external resources. The 
external resources can be a URL, but can also be a refer-
ence	to	a	specific	place	 in	a	printed	book.	This	system	
will also store information about who is responsible for 
asserting the co-reference, when it was done, and option-
al comments (Eide 2008). Further development is neces-
sary to evaluate if this method will be usable in practical 
work. 
Another implementation is the tagging tool created at 
FORTH in Greece as a diploma thesis by Kostas Py-
loudis and Pasxalis  Georgopoulos.  The tagging tool is 
a web based application in which HTML web pages and 
photographs on the internet can be co-referenced and an-
notated by the user. The operation includes selecting a 
part of the document, so that part of an image, e.g. the 
head of one person, can be co-referred to a string in a 
HTML document, e.g. a name (Melesanakis 2008). This 
is an interesting attempt to enable anyone to take part 
in building up collections of co-reference information. 
Methods used by the Perseus Digital Library in their 
information integration work are also similar to the co-
reference approach (Babeu 2007). 
Level 2: Network of identity 
After a while, many co-references have been stored in 
many institutions, some of them referring to the same 
individuals. All such co-reference collections should be 
connected and made available in a cross-institutional 
system. 
The systems at level 1 described above will be sustain-
able, because the organisations gain from using them. 
The federated system will be the sum of all the two-
way links from the level 1 systems. A model for such a 
system is described in (Meghini 2008). The article also 
describes a possible implementation. The system will 
be able to answer questions about the entities being co-
referred. If it is connected to information systems storing 
information about e.g. events, it will be a very interest-
ing tool for exploring large data sets based on cultural 
heritage information. 
Conclusions 
To	integrate	the	wider	cultural	heritage	field,	it	is	neces-
sary to connect persons, places, and objects described 
in and owned by museums to references in e.g. digital 
versions of printed books. It is not enough to connect 
classes of information, particular items will also have 
to	be	connected.	Thus,	co-reference	tools	will	find	their	
place among the other tools used in the development of 
the Semantic Web. 
The CIDOC co-reference working group was estab-
lished in 2007. We are currently working on the research 
and implementation described above. We are also devel-
oping prototype protocols for exchanging co-reference 
information between systems. We hope to set up a small 
integrated test system in 2009 in order to show how such 
systems may be implemented. 
Literature 
Babeu, A., Bamman, D., Crane, G., Kummer, R. and 
Weaver,	 G.	 (2007).	 “Named	 Entity	 Identification	 and	
Cyberinfrastructure.” In: Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, volume 4675. 
Bennett,	R.,	Hengel-Dittrich	C.,	O’Neill,	E.T.	and	Tillett	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  103
B.B. (2006). “USA VIAF (Virtual International Author-
ity File): Linking Die Deutsche Bibliothek and Library 
of Congress Name Authority Files.” 72nd IFLA Gen-
eral Conference.	 URL:	 http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla72/
papers/123-Bennett-en.pdf (checked 2008-11-14). 
Bradley, J. and Short, H. (2005). “Texts into Databases: 
The Evolving Field of New-style Prosopography.” P. 
3-24 in: Literary and Linguistic Computing. 
Day, D., Hitzeman, J., Wick, M., Crouch, K and Poesio, 
M (2008). “A Corpus for Cross-Document Co-refer-
ence.” P. 2996-2999 in: Proceedings of the Sixth Interna-
tional Language Resources and Evaluation	(LREC’08).	
Eide, Ø. (2008). “The Unit for Digital Documentation 
(EDD) system for storing coref information. A short 
overview of a system under development.” Paper pre-
sented at the meeting of the CIDOC Co-Reference 
Working Group, Athens. URL: http://cidoc.mediahost.
org/co-reference-meetings-2008(en)(E1).xml (checked 
2008-11-14) 
Meghini, C., Doerr, M. and Spyratos N. (2008). “Man-
aging co-reference knowledge for data integration.” P. 
229-248 in: Proceedings of EJC2008, the 18th Europe-
an-Japanese Conference on Information Modelling and 
Knowledge Bases. 
Melesanakis, V. (2008) “Tagging-Tool.” Paper presented 
at the meeting of the CIDOC Co-Reference Working 
Group, Athens. URL: http://cidoc.mediahost.org/co-
reference-meetings-2008(en)(E1).xml (checked 2008-
11-14). 
 
