Corpus Analysis and Literary 
History
Matthew Wilkens 
Rice University 
wilkens@rice.edu		
The problem of periodization has long occupied lit-erary studies. Our ability to distinguish the cultural 
and aesthetic production of one era from that of another 
is a basic assumption of our historicizing critical meth-
od. Moreover, there exists a broad consensus concerning 
the general arc of literary history and its major moments. 
As	a	practical	matter,	however,	we	often	find	such	peri-
ods to be both less mutually distinct and less internally 
uniform than we have been lead to believe. When, for 
instance, does modernism begin and end? And what, ex-
actly, do Proust, Joyce, Woolf, and Hemingway have in 
common, to say nothing of mass-market detective and 
shopgirl	fiction	from	the	same	era?
Such uncertainty is neither insurmountable nor even es-
pecially problematic, but it does emphasize the centrality 
and the limitations of both close reading and theorization 
as the working methods of literary study. Because we 
can	read	only	a	finite	(and	quite	small)	number	of	texts,	
the	specific	texts	that	we	do manage to read will have a 
disproportionate	 influence	on	our	understanding	of	 the	
larger	field	 of	 cultural	 production	we	understand	 them	
to represent. Theorization is then frequently dedicated 
to working back out or up from this restricted corpus 
of widely read material to the larger set social and eco-
nomic arrangements that must have been in place so that 
work of just such a type could have been produced.
There’s	nothing	wrong	with	this	approach,	but	it	would	
be useful to have relative measures of the extent to which 
the periods and associated genres we now commonly 
identify	in	literary	history	apply	to	the	full	field	of	liter-
ary production over the last several centuries. That is, 
we would like to be able to answer questions about the 
coherence of literary periods and genres, their internal 
variation, their distinction from one another, the sharp-
ness of the breaks between them, and the mechanics of 
the transitions between them, and we would like to be 
able to do all this with reference not just to a restricted 
corpus or canon, but to the broadest possible survey of 
texts. We would also like to know whether or not there 
exist discernibly coherent periods, genres, or geographic 
regions	that	we	have	not	yet	identified,	or	if	our	current	
historical/geographic/generic boundaries are the best 
possible ones.
The work presented in this paper describes the early 
steps and initial results of a long-term project designed 
to address these issues. Building on insights and tools 
pioneered in corpus linguistics (see especially the work 
of Mark Davies at BYU), but aiming squarely at ques-
tions of literary history and theory, this work begins with 
the	construction	of	a	significant	corpus	of	public-domain	
literary texts spanning the sixteenth to twentieth centu-
ries from the Gutenberg archive. Gutenberg, of course, 
is not a typical scholarly resource, but it has the advan-
tage of being large and unencumbered by intellectual 
property restrictions; one of the intermediate products of 
the work presented here is an evaluation of its relative 
merits and suitability in comparison to the smaller but 
fully	 curated	Wright	American	 fiction	 and	Chadwyck-
Healy	 nineteenth-century	 fiction	 collections	 from	 the	
MONK Project. The paper describes the techniques used 
to construct and to characterize this corpus, as well as 
the	quantitative	results	of	this	analysis.	It	is	thus	the	first	
full, computationally assisted description and evaluation 
of	the	Gutenberg	English-language	fiction	holdings	as	a	
resource for digital literary studies.
The paper also advances a set of conclusions based on 
these results and in dialogue with existing theoretical 
work on literary-cultural periodization. There is reason 
to believe that the comparatively brief periods of rap-
id change between more stable literary eras should be 
marked by increased incidence of allegorical and tropo-
logical language use (this fact of course superimposed 
on long-term baseline changes in, for example, metaphor 
generally).	Although	it	is	as	yet	difficult	to	measure	such	
features directly (but see interestingly related attempts 
such as Pasanek and Sculley, “Mining millions of meta-
phors,”	LLC	23	[2008]:	345-60;	Bei	Yu’s	2006	disserta-
tion on literary text mining; and Matthew Jockers and 
Franco	Moretti’s	as-yet	unpublished	work	on	automatic	
genre	 classification),	 the	 present	 analysis	 suggests	 that	
texts drawn from such transitional periods are relatively 
poor in adjectives and adverbs, a fact that may corre-
spond to their increased reliance on tropes (the expres-
sive ability of which is diminished by increased speci-
ficity).	 By	 examining	 the	 historical	 variations	 of	 such	
features, we may begin to reshape our understanding of 
periodization and its mechanisms.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  297
