Co-word Analysis of Research 
Topics in Digital Humanities 
Xiaoguang Wang 
Ritsumeikan University 
whu_wxg@126.com
Mitsuyuki Inaba 
Ritsumeikan University 
inabam@sps.ritsumei.ac.jp 
Introduction 
Over the last two decades, digital humanities has be-come increasingly popular. Trying to combine com-
puting with traditional disciplines of arts and humanities, 
digital humanities researchers have come from various 
fields	such	as	history,	philosophy,	linguistics,	literature,	
arts, and archaeology. While the interdisciplinary aspect 
of digital humanities is obvious, its disciplinary structure 
has not been established yet. In order to identify hot top-
ics and map the disciplinary structure, we made co-word 
analysis	based	on	a	group	of	research	papers’	titles.	
Related Works 
Co-word analysis is a content analysis technique that 
uses patterns of co-occurrence of pairs of terms, i.e., 
words or phrases, in a corpus of texts to identify the re-
lationship between these terms, the extent to which these 
themes are central to the whole area, and the degree to 
which these themes are internally structured (Qin, 1999). 
It	 does	 not	 rely	 on	 any	 a	 priori	 definition	 of	 research	
themes in science. This enables us to follow actors ob-
jectively and detect the structure of science without re-
ducing them to the extremes of either internalism or ex-
ternalism (Callon et al., 1986). 
Method and Data 
The	first	step	of	co-word	analysis	is	to	extract	keywords	
from records in corpus. We chose 516 papers written in 
English from two journals and four conference proceed-
ings: Literary and Linguistic Computing from Year 2005 
to 2008, Digital Humanities Quarterly from Year 2007 
to 2008, and proceedings of ACH/ALLC 2005, DH 2006, 
DH 2007, and DH 2008. Since these papers have no au-
thor keywords, we manually extracted keywords from 
their titles and picked out 1231 distinct keywords, which 
appeared 2040 times in total. 
McLuhan, Eric, and Frank Zingrone. (1995). Essential 
McLuhan. Concord, Ont.: House of Anansi.
Newman, Dan. (2000). The Dragon Naturally Speaking 
Guide, 2nd ed. Berkeley: WavesidePublishing. Online. 
Available: http://lib.store.yaoo.net/lib/sayican/online-
book.html.  Accessed 11/6/08.
Ozick, Cynthia. (2008). Dictation: A Quartet. New York: 
Houghton	Mifflin.
Seltzer, Mark. (1992). Bodies and Machines. New York: 
Routledge.
Short, R. W. (1946) The sentence structure of Henry 
James, American Literature, 18(2): 71-88.
Thurschwell, Pamela. (2001). Literature, Technology 
and Magical Thinking, 1880-1920.  Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  149
Table 1 Top 70 high-frequency keywords 
We conducted co-word analysis with two aims. One is 
to	detect	the	structure	of	a	research	field,	and	the	other	
to detect minor but potentially growing areas. To ac-
complish these two aims, we selected top 70 keywords 
(5.68%) whose frequencies were higher than 4 (see Ta-
ble 1). 
These	keywords’	total	frequency	was	681	(33.38%).	
We calculated the association values between any word 
pairs	with	Equivalence	Coefficient	index	(E) which can 
be	defined	as	follows:	
Eij  =   C
2
ij
            Ci x Cj
Cij is the number of documents in which the keyword 
pair (i and j) appears. Ci and Cj are the occurrence fre-
quencies of Keywords i and j in the group of the articles 
respectively. Eij has a value between 0 and 1. Eij mea-
sures the probability of Keyword i appearing simultane-
ously in a document set, indexed by Keyword j, and vice 
versa, given the respective collection frequencies of the 
two keywords. Therefore, Eij	is	called	“a	coefficient	of	
mutual inclusion” by Turner et al. (1988). 
Results 
Based	on	the	Equivalence	Coefficient	indexes,	we	con-
structed a co-occurrence matrix, and then made a multi-
dimensional analysis. 
Fig. 1 Multi-dimensional analysis of keywords 
Combining	 the	 keywords’	 frequencies	 with	 the	 multi-
dimensional analysis (see Fig. 1), we can see that the 
keywords in digital humanities can be divided into three 
categories.	The	keywords	that	fall	under	the	first	catego-
ry—the ones without underlines or frames—are directly 
related to information technologies, such as digital, TEI, 
XML, web, online, visual, and metadata. The hot topics 
in this category include visualization, markup, text min-
ing, annotation, and digital library. The keywords that 
fall under the second category, the ones framed, can be 
associated with traditional humanities including liter-
ary, linguistics, history, culture, language, poetry, novel, 
and speech. With support of the information technolo-
gies mentioned above, many researchers have focused 
on medieval and early modern literatures, translation be-
tween literary works in different languages, authorship, 
gender, and stylistics. The third category with the key-
words being underlined consists of some general words, 
such as knowledge, model, and framework. 
Figure 1 shows these three categories all mix together, 
with no obvious clusters in them. This means digital 
humanities is still a new discipline without any subdis-
ciplines formed. What should be particularly noticed is 
that English and French have been studied more than 
other languages. This indicates that digital humanities 
research has made uneven progress, depending upon 
languages. 
A co-word network was drawn with the co-occurrence 
matrix	(see	Fig.	2).	We	calculated	nodes’	degree	centrali-
ties in the co-word network with social network analysis 
method. Degree centrality means the number of co-oc-
currence with other keywords. As Figure 2 shows, all the 
keywords can be divided into three levels, according to 
their degree centralities. 
An interesting phenomenon in Table 1 and Figure 2 is 
that the frequencies of “digital humanities” and “human-
ities computing” are high, but their degree centralities 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 150
are low, while most of the others are coessential. A major 
reason seems that digital humanities research has been 
furthered in recent years. Six fundamental concepts have 
been	found	which	may	benefit	from	the	dissemination	of	
technologies related to textual digitalization. Still, digi-
tal humanities is a new discipline, and researchers have 
been trying to integrate digital technologies with tradi-
tional	arts	and	humanities.	Some	recent	papers’	titles	in-
clude these two keywords and some other low frequency 
keywords that may indicate new research directions, 
e.g., geographical information system and interactive 
games. We could interpret, therefore, these keywords 
might work as an indicator for the future research topics 
in digital humanities. While not giving the complete pic-
ture	of	the	digital	humanities’	discipline	structure,	Figure	
2 is complementary to the “intellectual map” painted by 
McCarty W. and Short H. (2002). 
Fig. 2 Co-word network (node size indicates its degree 
centrality) 
Conclusions 
In this paper, we analyzed the structure of digital human-
ities with co-word method. We counted frequencies of 
keywords which we picked out from the titles of the se-
lected journal papers, recently published. Then we made 
a multi-dimensional analysis and a network analysis. As 
a result, six fundamental concepts are found in digital 
humanities, but there are no clear subdisciplines in it yet. 
While a widely used method in library and information 
science, co-word analysis is still new for digital humani-
ties researchers. In the future, we will improve this anal-
ysis further more in terms of methodology, developing 
an integrated software for its common applications in 
digital humanities. 
References 
Callon, M., Law, J., and Rip, A. (1986). How to study 
the force of science. In Callon, M., Law, J., and Rip, A. 
(eds.), Mapping the dynamics of science and technol-
ogy: Sociology of science in the real world. London: The 
Macmillan Press Ltd, pp. 3-15. 
McCarty,	 W.	 &	 Short,	 H.	 Mapping	 the	 field.	 (2002).	
http://www.allc.org/content/pubs/map.html 
Qin, H. (1999). Knowledge discovery through co-word 
analysis. Library Trends, 48(1):133-159. 
Turner, W. A., Chartron, G., Laville, E., and Michelet, 
B. (1988). Packaging information for peer review: New 
co-word analysis techniques. In Van Raan, A. F. J. (ed.), 
Handbook of quantitative studies of science and technol-
ogy. Netherlands: Elsevier Science Publishers, pp. 291-
323.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  151
