Creating a Composite Cultural 
Heritage Artifact – the Digital 
Object
Fenella G. France 
Library of Congress 
frfr@loc.gov 
Eric F. Hansen 
Library of Congress 
ehan@loc.gov 
Michael B. Toth 
R. B. Toth Associates 
mbt.rbtoth@gmail.com
Advanced digital spectral imaging is now becoming a key interdisciplinary analytical tool for use in the 
examination, assessment and understanding of cultural 
heritage preservation and interpretation in the humani-
ties. This involves the integration of advanced technolo-
gies, work processes and a range of skills from various 
fields.		This	includes	experts	in	materials	science	and	in-
formation technology with social scientists through the 
development of methodologies to ensure preservation, 
distribution and access to all aspects of cultural heritage. 
The critical component of developing this research area 
is to develop collaborations between researchers in mul-
tiple disciplines. The Library of Congress is develop-
ing	and	refining	this	tool	for	preservation	of	significant	
cultural heritage artifacts, including the Waldseemüller 
1507	World	Map,	the	first	and	second	drafts	of	the	Get-
tysburg	Address,	and	the	L’Enfant	(1791)	plan	of	Wash-
ington D.C.  Under the direction of the senior preserva-
tion scientist, Dr. Fenella France, a team of preservation 
scientists and imaging specialists developed imaging 
and data management capabilities to ensure preserva-
tion, distribution and access to information on these and 
other cultural heritage objects. This information proved 
critical in supporting collaborations between researchers 
in multiple disciplines, enhancing the ability to under-
stand and mitigate the potential and inevitable loss of 
information due to the natural degradation of materials.
Hyperspectral imaging involves the capture of a range 
of	 specific	 wavelengths	 in	 the	 visible	 and	 non-visible	
spectrums. To access this wealth of image data, three key 
aspects of digital data capture and management must be 
addressed:
•	 The image acquisition process and the required ad-
aptation for high quality images of large documents 
and manuscripts
•	 Processing	of	digital	images	integrated	with	specific	
interpretation for preservation and scholars
•	 Implementation of effective metadata standards and 
data management systems
This paper will primarily address the integration of digi-
tal image acquisition and processing to develop a non-
destructive analytical technique that allows the char-
acterization of inks, colorants, treatments, substrates, 
deterioration, and lost information – all critical elements 
for preservation.
Imaging research at the Library of Congress includes the 
collection of sequential narrow wavelength bands of im-
ages from the ultraviolet, through the visible spectrum 
to the infrared (approximately 300nm – 1100nm). This 
hyperspectral imaging collects contiguous wavelengths, 
detecting variances in responses from materials in the ar-
tifact at any wavelength or combination of wavelengths. 
The team of preservation and imaging scientists working 
with a MegaVision 39 Megapixel monochrome camera 
and Equipoise LED EurekaLights image the items of 
cultural heritage – documents, leaves of manuscripts, 
daguerreotypes, in each spectral band.  This yields a 
large data cube of digital images and metadata for each 
artifact. The resulting collected images are digitally 
combined with or subtracted from each other to form the 
processed image or “digital object” that provides greater 
analysis and interpretation of the original real cultural 
artifact. These processed images contain a wealth of in-
formation,	but	 it	 is	 the	 significant	 levels	of	multidisci-
plinary interpretation required to process and analyze the 
data collected, that forms the new digital object.
The Library of Congress is building on the past two 
decades of characterization of ancient texts and docu-
ments using advanced digital imaging techniques.  It is 
developing these research methods to advance studies of 
other media and cultural heritage items, as well as new 
techniques	for	specific	preservation	requirements.	 	The	
ongoing research and development highlights the utility 
of transferring advanced imaging techniques developed 
for defense and astronomical studies to the preserva-
tion	 of	 significant	 cultural	 heritage	 artifacts.	 Specific	
studies that have led to the current developments in ad-
vanced digital imaging include the Dead Sea Scrolls, 
the Khaboris Codex, Archimedes Palimpsest, and the 
Oxyrhynchus Papyri. Each of these studies has revealed 
some of the issues and challenges involved with apply-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 114
ing advanced imaging and processing techniques to re-
searching cultural heritage documents and artifacts. For 
example, complex image processing previously used to 
recover images from astronomical telescopes, has been 
adapted to reveal what the original woodblock that was 
used in the printing of the Waldseemüller map probably 
resembled. Integrating an analysis of the techniques 
used by a woodcut maker in the 1500s informs under-
standing of materials and choices made even though the 
original woodcut no longer exists. All of this research 
underscores the need to integrate social and material sci-
ences with the digital object to better understand issues 
of technological and other choices in the creation of the 
original object. Styles and the delicate detail attained 
were compared with copper engraving by researchers in 
the 20th century still attempting to understand the innate 
technical skills. Layering the information to show later 
additions by cartographers and printers adds more to the 
complexity and potential utilization of the digital object. 
The ability to process this information needed to collect 
useful data associated with substrates and media without 
physical sampling is critical to the assessment and pres-
ervation of many international items of cultural heritage. 
In addition, analysis for transcription and translation of 
deteriorated ancient texts requires collaboration between 
conservation and scholars for effective translation. These 
aspects will be outlined in more detail in the paper.
While advances in image acquisition processes are criti-
cal, it is the post-capture processing that creates the new 
digital object of interest in this discussion. This process-
ing and interpretation of acquired images is integral to 
the creation of the information necessary for the preser-
vation, analysis and assessment of these cultural artifacts 
through digital spectral imaging. This digital image pro-
cessing has evolved from simply choosing the best spec-
tral band and collecting images in that band (mono-spec-
tral),	 through	 principle	 component	 analysis	 of	 specific	
wavelength combinations and pseudo-color processing, 
to the current advanced algorithmic image processing 
utilizing the combination of registered images in various 
non-visible and visible spectrum regions.
As noted previously, hyperspectral imaging creates large 
volumes of data for processing, analysis and interpre-
tation and requires understanding of these new digital 
objects and the levels of information contained within. 
Data and metadata management is imperative to inte-
grating digital imaging and processing capabilities for 
studies of cultural artifacts in the humanities. Creating 
the digital object requires effective systems and infor-
mation management to ensure that the large amounts of 
digital data generated can be readily acquired, stored, 
archived, accessed, processed and linked to other data. 
The creation of a new “digital object” that combines the 
real	cultural	artifact	and	 the	processed	digital	files	and	
information has established a new category of cultural 
artifact in the humanities.  The resulting composite digi-
tal object allows insights into methods of construction, 
the impact of society and technology and scholarly in-
formation on how this informs researchers and our un-
derstanding of previous societies.  This can be used to 
address questions such as: 
•	 Why did artists and artisans develop and employ 
those	 specific	 techniques	 that	were	 used	 to	 create	
the real artifact? 
•	 How were these restricted or informed by available 
tools, cultural norms, religious or moral beliefs? 
•	 Did the creator demonstrate a break from tradition 
that was only now being revealed through the avail-
ability of advanced spectral information? 
Integration of information from the original object and 
the digital imaging is a critical component in the organi-
zation and access to the digital object. Developed from 
GIS, the concept of “scriptospatial” or "image-spatial" 
tagging of key points on the images is the equivalent 
of a global positioning system for documents and ob-
jects.	The	 linkage	 of	 information	 from	 other	 scientific	
analyses, or scholarly interpretations of revealed details 
revealed by the advanced digital image processing is an 
important element in the generation of an integrated dig-
ital object that allows the interpretation and assimilation 
of a range of data that is at times in different data sets.
The critical breakthrough in the adoption of hyperspec-
tral digital imaging was the maturity its development 
– resolution, integrated conservation safe lighting and 
management – to concentrate on and answer these ques-
tions, while also addressing the issues involved for this 
technique to become accepted as a true non-invasive 
non-destructive analytical tool with no risk to fragile 
historic	 artifacts	 in	 the	 field	 of	 cultural	 conservation.	
Hyperspectral imaging has the capacity to reveal infor-
mation, data and details not visible or accessible from 
the historic artifact itself due to deterioration.  This high-
lights the necessary integration between materials sci-
ence, digital spectral imaging and the social implications 
of retrieving lost information. This generation of new 
information includes that created from advanced digital 
image processing of the large volume of acquired data.
In conclusion, providing useful information to support 
conservation research and scholarly studies requires the 
effective integration and application of new technologies, 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  115
work	processes	and	technical	skills	to	the	field.		The	use	
of multi- and now hyperspectral imaging as an effective 
conservation tool has allowed the development of non-
destructive analytical tools that allow the safe analysis 
and examination of texts and documents.  This requires 
the integrtion of a range of associated activities and pro-
cesses:  imaging artifacts in a range of spectral bands, 
capturing important metadata about the digital records, 
storing the digital data and associated metadata, process-
ing the images and data to yield useful information, and 
making the information available for researchers in the 
humanities, conservation professionals and the public. 
Future accomplishments in the creation of a new digi-
tal object will be dependent on economic development 
of integrated image information systems, continued ad-
vances in image technology, and the effective integration 
of data access, storage, management and interpretation. 
This requires continuing innovation and collaborations 
of imaging and preservation scientists, information tech-
nology professionals, conservators and researchers in the 
humanities.
References
Casini, A, et al. Image Spectroscopy Mapping Technique 
for Noninvasive Analysis of Paintings, Studies in Con-
servation 44 (1999) 39-48
Easton, R.L. Jr., Knox. K, Christens-Barry, W.A. Multi-
spectral imaging of the Archimedes palimpsest. In: Pro-
ceedings of 32nd Applied Imagery Pattern Recognition 
Workshop	(IEEE-AIPR’03)	(2003)	111–116
France, F.G. Managing digital image repositories as key 
tools in the preservation of cultural objects, Imaging Sci-
ence and Technology Conference, Arlington, VA, 2007
France, F.G. and Toth, M.B. Developing cultural heri-
tage preservation databases based on Dublin Core data 
elements, Dublin Core Conference, Manzanillo, Mexico, 
October 2006
Grenacher, F. The Woodcut Map: A form-cutter of maps 
wanders through Europe in the first quarter of the six-
teenth century, Imago Mundi, Vol 24 (1970) 31-41
Knox, K. “Enhancement of overwritten text in the Ar-
chimedes Palimpsest,’’ in Computer Image Analysis in 
the Study of Art, San Jose, California, Proc. SPIE, vol. 
6810 (2007)
Knox, K.T. et al., “Image Restoration of Damaged or 
Erased Manuscripts”, European Signal Processing Con-
ference, Lausanne (2008)
Knox, K. and Easton, R.L. Jr.: Recovery of lost writings 
on historical manuscripts with ultraviolet illumination. 
In: Fifth International Symposium on Multispectral Co-
lour Science (Part of PICS 2003 Conference), Rochester, 
NY (2003) 301–306
Plaza, A, et al., Recent Advances in Techniques for Hy-
perspectral Image Processing, Remote Sensing of Envi-
ronment, Elsevier Science, July 2007
Reedy, C. L. and Reedy, T. J. Relating visual and tech-
nological style in Tibetan sculpture analysis, World Ar-
chaeology 25(3) (1994) 304-320
Toth, M.B. “Management of Digital Archives for Inte-
grated	Web	Access	 to	Scientific	 and	Cultural	 Informa-
tion”, Society for Imaging Science and Technology, 
Archiving Conference, Arlington, Virginia, May 21-24 
(2007)
Toth, M.B., Emery, D. “Encoding Archimedes Work 
with TEI to Complete a 10-Year Program”, Text Encod-
ing Initiative Annual Members Meeting, London (2008)
Walvoord, D, Easton, R. Jr., “Digital Transcription of 
the Archimedes Palimpsest”, IEEE Signal Processing 
Magazine p. 100-104, July (2008) 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 116
