Cultural Capital in the Digital 
Era: Mapping the Success of 
Thomas Pynchon
Edward Finn 
Stanford University 
edfinn@stanford.edu
Overview
This	paper	will	 present	 some	of	my	first	work	on	a	larger dissertation project: a new model for cultural 
capital in the digital era. In a time of rapidly evolving 
ecologies of reading and writing, I argue that the Internet 
affords us massive amounts of new data on previously 
invisible cultural transactions. New architectures for 
reviewing, discussing and sharing books blur the lines 
between readers, authors and critics, and these cultural 
structures capture thousands of conversations, mental 
connections and personal recommendations that previ-
ously went unrecorded. Through a close examination 
of the networks of cultural interchange surrounding the 
work	of	Thomas	Pynchon,	I	hope	to	define	a	new,	statis-
tically informed conception of cultural capital and dif-
ferent modes of critical and commercial literary success.
Background
This paper takes as its starting point the idea that cultural 
capital	can	be	defined	or	at	least	mapped	online	through	
exchanges	 at	 the	 intersection	of	 literature	 as	 a	field	 of	
art and the business of buying and selling books.1 The 
advent of new media is transforming this landscape of 
literary production and consumption, making possible 
all sorts of new ecologies of reading and writing. At 
the same time, many transactions at the heart of digital 
cultural capital (i.e. customer reviews, shared libraries, 
“also-bought” lists, etc) are now captured in digital am-
ber. Just as importantly, long-running statistical research 
into text-mining and content extraction has made effec-
tive tools available to map out semantic links between 
concepts and proper nouns in text archives. By combin-
ing data from digital ecologies and professional critical 
book reviews, I will compare the networks of cultural 
reception and critique that make for authorial fame. This 
combination of research methodologies promises new 
insights not only into the vast datasets of internet culture 
but also into the often-hidden cultural relationships that 
exist between various professional and popular archives, 
some of which reach back decades or centuries. There 
are exciting possibilities here for tracing the networks of 
influence	and	exchange	that	make	up	contemporary	liter-
ary success and bringing some empirical rigor to often 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 104
vague conceptions of cultural capital.
Proposal
As I work on the larger project of outlining a new, digi-
tal cultural capital, I propose a paper that explores some 
of these themes in the more limited arena of a particu-
lar	 contemporary	 author:	Thomas	 Pynchon.	 Pynchon’s	
pointed refusal to offer a public presence to the standard 
engines of publicity and authorial fame (he lives in more 
or less total secrecy, allegedly in Manhattan, and no clear 
photographs have been taken of him for decades) makes 
him an ideal candidate. Perhaps more than any other 
major contemporary author, he has relied on particular 
forms of cultural capital to earn literary fame, even as he 
critiques the social transformations wrought by capital-
ism through his work.
This paper will attempt to map the network of Pyn-
chon’s	cultural	capital	and,	through	this	exercise,	make	
some larger claims about how cultural capital functions 
in the digital era. I will combine a broad reading of the 
discourses Pynchon engages in his novels with a study 
of the critical and popular reception of his work. If the 
statistical analyses I perform here cannot “prove” or 
“disprove” that reading, they will still inform it, just as 
the	reading	will	inform	my	interpretations	of	Pynchon’s	
cultural	network	maps.	I	see	Pynchon	as	a	bridge	figure	
between the emerging discourses of post-War techno-su-
premacy, information theory, the new managerial class, 
and American consumerism. According to this position 
the allusive density and postmodern genre-bending of 
Pynchon’s	 novels	 serve	 in	 effect	 to	 train	 readers	 in	 a	
form of interdisciplinary network reading. Dealing with 
such disparate and detailed threads of information, we all 
become paranoid connection-seekers, bridging different 
chasms	 and	 structures	 of	 knowledge	 across	 Pynchon’s	
varied literary terrain. One question these results will 
necessarily address is to what extent Pynchon readers 
are more drawn to participation in his cultural networks 
online as compared to readers of other relatively similar 
contemporary authors (see methodology, below).
One of the most effectively reclusive authors on the con-
temporary scene, Pynchon has succeeded admirably in 
allowing public attention to focus solely on his work. I 
hypothesize	that	Pynchon’s	difficult,	boundary-breaking	
books succeed in forging their own ideational networks, 
and	 that	 their	 author	 has	 both	 exploited	 and	 redefined	
contemporary cultural capital. In this way Pynchon plac-
es his readers in exactly the position they have assumed 
in new digital ecologies of reading and writing: the role 
of critic/operator, of consumer/creator, who grapples 
with	unstable	fictional	ontologies	from	the	vantage	point	
of equally unstable critical ontologies.
Methodology
There is no comprehensive dataset or perfected analyti-
cal tool for exploring cultural capital, so this paper will 
construct its argument with several imperfect measures. 
The argument will draw primarily on results from a new, 
wide-ranging dataset of reviews incorporating “high-
brow” cultural review publications like The New York 
Times, academic journals, popular media and customer 
reviews from blogs and websites such as Amazon.com. 
Using a combination of APIs, Perl scripts and commer-
cial databases, I am assembling a targeted dataset of 
professional and popular reviews and recommendations 
from the book review archives of major newspapers, 
magazines, and the websites Amazon and LibraryThing, 
with more academic, popular and commercial archives 
to follow should time permit.2 Using named entity rec-
ognition (NER) and part of speech tagging (PoS), I will 
construct social and conceptual network maps based on 
this corpus to explore a) how Pynchon was introduced or 
integrated	 into	 the	 existing	cultural	firmament,	 b)	who	
reviewed and/or was mentioned in connection with Pyn-
chon and how these networks evolve, c) what insights 
I can draw from resonances and differences in the con-
ceptual maps drawn from different categories of cultural 
reaction (e.g. professional reviews vs. reader reviews). 
This analysis will adapt an available open-source NER 
and	PoS	text-mining	tool	(most	likely	Carnegie	Mellon’s	
AutoMap	or	the	University	of	Massachusetts’	Proximity) 
to construct the network maps.
These maps, while hopefully revelatory, will not offer 
much in the way of quantitative measurement of social 
capital or literary success. To address the problem of 
quantifying cultural capital, I will be creating control 
groups of books for each Pynchon work discussed. These 
groups of 5-10 novels will be selected based on their cul-
tural proximity to the relevant Pynchon work (a messy 
term, I concede): published within a year of the Pynchon 
work; written by an author with similar style, interests 
and/or who might be reasonably said to compete with 
Pynchon; greeted with similar levels of highbrow ac-
claim, and greeted (to the extent this can be determined) 
with similar levels of commercial success. It is my hope 
that the potential liabilities of any particular judgment or 
selection will be ameliorated in aggregate, and that the 
control groups will still provide a reasonable baseline for 
studying	how	Pynchon’s	work	has	fared	over	time.
Using	these	baselines,	Pynchon’s	work	will	also	be	con-
sidered along several more quantitative metrics. I will 
trace the historical reception of his work through mea-
sures of annual MLA citations and popular press cita-
tions (the latter will most likely use a small index of pub-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  105
lications—newspapers and magazines with consistent 
national	presence	over	the	past	50	years).	Since	sales	fig-
ures	are	notoriously	difficult	to	come	by,	I	will	attempt	
to chart the current popularity and lasting success of 
Pynchon’s	books	by	looking	at	library	presence	(through	
meta-catalogs like Worldcat.org), used books available 
for purchase online, and presence on library sharing sites 
like LibraryThing. Of course these popularity statistics 
will be judged comparatively against their normative 
control groups. Finally, I should note that while the con-
trol groups will allow some metrics to be tracked over 
time (citations, for example), used book availability, li-
brary presence and some other factors will necessarily be 
limited to a snapshot of current conditions.
Conclusion
By exploring contemporary networks of cultural capi-
tal related to the work of Thomas Pynchon, I hope to 
develop tools and statistical methodologies that will be 
adaptable to other authors in my own project and to other 
scholars for their own work. I am aware of limited ap-
plications of social and conceptual network mapping in 
literary	study,	but	in	extensive	searches	I	have	yet	to	find	
an easily adaptable tool that non-technical literary schol-
ars might use to explore a new corpus. I hope to close 
this gap at least partially as I make my own arguments 
about the evolving nature of digital cultural capital.
Notes
The notion of cultural capital discussed here is based 
most directly on the work of John Guillory in Cultural 
Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation, and 
through him Pierre Bourdieu. The term is a fraught one 
and	a	 full	definition	 is	beyond	 the	scope	of	 this	paper.	
Instead, I hope to lay the groundwork for a new, digital 
understanding	of	cultural	networks	and	influence	as	they	
relate to literary production in the larger capitalist sys-
tem, using cultural capital as a bracketed general term.
To	 briefly	 explain	 my	 choice	 of	 websites:	Amazon	 is	
an obvious choice because of its active reviewing com-
munity and relatively long-running archive, with over a 
decade of reviews available. Publishers Weekly declared 
LibraryThing the most popular of the social reading 
network sites, and it also encourages an active group of 
user-reviewers. A more extensive study will, with luck, 
involve other major book-reviewing sites online.
Selected Bibliography
Bourdieu, P. (1984). Distinction: A Social Critique of 
the Judgment of Taste. Trans. Richard Nice. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1993). The Field of Cultural Production: 
Essays on Art and Literature. Ed. Randal Johnson. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
English, J. (2005). The Economy of Prestige. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Guillory, J. (1993). Cultural Capital: The Problem of 
Literary Canon Formation. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
Moretti, F. (2005). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstracted 
Models for a Literary History. London and New York: 
Verso.
Radway, J. (1997). A Feeling for Books: The Book-of-
the-Month Club, Literary Taste, and Middle-Class De-
sire. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 106
