Define	Me:	A	Cognitive	and	
Computational Approach 
to Critical Digital Identity 
Representation in Social 
Networking Applications 
D. Fox Harrell
Georgia Institute of Technology 
fox.harrell@lcc.gatech.edu	
Daniel Upton 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
dupton3@gatech.edu	
Ben Medler 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
	benmedler@gatech.edu	
Jichen Zhu 
Georgia Institute of Technology
jichen.zhu@lcc.gatech.edu	 
Invoking a theoretical framework situated at the in-tersection of humanistic accounts of social identity 
construction, cognition linguistics research, and digital 
media technologies, the Advanced Identity Represen-
tation (AIR) Project develops theory and technology 
for users to represent complex, dynamic social identi-
ties in digital media such as virtual worlds and social 
networking sites. Here, we primarily present DefineMe 
– Chimera, a social networking application that uses a 
dynamic system of categorization and allows users to 
define	each	other	through	metaphorical	projection.	De-
fineMe is grounded in an interdisciplinary approach that 
articulates the shared socio-cognitive substrates beneath 
user	 representations	 ranging	 from	user	 created	profiles	
on social networking sites to avatars in virtual worlds. 
Secondarily, we present Identity Share, a social net-
working project developed using the DefineMe database 
structure	that	allows	users	to	define	identity	categories,	
share	profiles,	and	anonymously	follow	each	other’s	web	
searching paths. The result of the projects is an early ar-
ticulation of a spectrum of new user identity representa-
tions with foci upon group membership, utilization/cre-
ation of boundary infrastructures (Bowker & Star 1999; 
Lave & Wenger 1991), along with cognitive models of 
metonomy, metaphor, and visual imagery. (Hutchins 
1996; Lakoff 1987) 
1. Introduction 
The Advanced Identity Representation (AIR) Project 
is the name given to the research endeavor in Fox Har-
rell’s	 Imagination,	Computation,	and	Expression	 (ICE)	
Lab/Studio investigating technology and theory to en-
able digital experiences that engage a richer range of so-
cial identity experiences than those found now in social 
networking, gaming, and virtual worlds software. We 
present DefineMe – Chimera and Identity Share as early 
steps toward this end. DefineMe – Chimera is a social 
networking application with a novel database system 
and a front-end Facebook web application. Users can 
label	 each	 other	 using	 self-defined	 predicates	 express-
ing their metaphorical similarities to various animals. 
These descriptions are used as a basis to construct and 
reconfigure	categories	on-the-fly	as	the	database	grows	
and to present chimera-like avatar characters to represent 
the user as composites of various iconic animal graphics. 
Though this project develops a whimsical, metaphorical 
model of user representation, the theoretical and techni-
cal underpinnings address issues such as co construction 
of identity categories between individuals, marginaliza-
tion and centrality within identity categories, and the 
imaginative nature of identity in race, ethnicity, and gen-
der critical contexts. 
Fig. 1 Metaphorical animal blend avatars potentially 
generated by DefineMe – Chimera 
As a second step toward enabling a new genre of digital 
media identity experiences, we present Identity Share, a 
critical web-based application that offers a balance be-
tween	allowing	users	 to	author	profiles	with	both	 self-
defined	 and	 normative	 social	 categories,	 at	 the	 same	
time as allowing users to specify the relative importance 
of particular categories. Identity Share allows users to 
anonymously give others permission to follow their web 
searches, view their wishlists with various websites, and 
leave comments on their experiences of “(web)walking 
in	another’s	shoes.”	The	goal	is	not	to	connect	users	as	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  131
friends, but rather to allow users to have the uncanny ex-
perience	of	viewing	and	sharing	aspects	of	each	others’	
needs, values, and desires. Together, DefineMe: Chimera 
and Identity Share exemplify early prototypes of the di-
rection that AIR Project systems may take in tackling 
social identity phenomena in the future. 
2. Theoretical Framework 
The AIR Project draws on a hybrid approach to issues 
of	 categorization	 and	 classification.	 Central	 influential	
theories important to the AIR Framework are described 
below. 
2.1 Cognitive Categorization, Metaphor, and Blending 
The AIR approach has some of its roots in grounded in 
cognitive science theory (Lakoff 1987) which asserts 
that categorization is a matter of both human experience 
and	imagination.	George	Lakoff’s	work	in	this	area	over	
two	 decades	 ago	 is	well	 known	 and	 influential,	 yet	 to	
our knowledge it is a thread that has been underdevel-
oped with respect to issues of social identity construc-
tion in the critical modes robustly developed in cultural 
studies with the humanities, especially this approach has 
not	 been	 significantly	 applied	 to	 cases	 of	 digital	 iden-
tity representation (an exciting exception being the work 
of Otto Santa Ana on metaphorical bias in Brown Tide 
Rising (Santa Ana 2002)). Cognitive science research re-
veals categories as being (1) based on “the same neural 
and cognitive mechanisms that allow us to perceive and 
move around” (Lakoff & Johnson 1999), (2) distributed 
across members of a social group, external artifacts, and 
even time (Hutchins 1996, 2000), and (3) always situ-
ated in particular social and cultural contexts (Lave & 
Wenger 1991). Important for the purposes here, Lakoff 
describes a conceptual metaphor-based theory of how 
imaginative extensions of “prototype effects” result in 
several phenomena of social identity categorization that 
are useful for the AIR Project (Lakoff 1987). These phe-
nomena include representatives (prototypes) or “best ex-
ample” members of categories, stereotypes that indicate 
normal, but often misleading, category expectations, and 
more. Conceptual blending theory builds upon Gilles 
Fauconnier’s	mental	 spaces	 theory	 (Fauconnier	 1985),	
elaborates insights from metaphor theory (Fauconnier 
2006), and attempts to account for a wider range of se-
mantic phenomena. 
2.2	Sociology	of	Classification	Infrastructures	
The	AIR	 Project	 is	 influenced	 by	 accounts	 of	 classifi-
cation from sociology and science studies. In Sorting 
Things Out (Bowker & Star 1999), Geoffrey Bowker 
and	Susan	Leigh	Star	make	 the	case	 that	classification	
systems are necessary for information exchange and 
communication. The social challenges regarding clas-
sification	systems	arise	from	cases	where	tension	exists	
between	contexts,	for	examples,	when	one’s	self-concep-
tion differs from prevalent social stereotypes. Important 
tools for bridging between communities are “boundary 
objects,”	defined	by	Bowker	and	Star	as	objects	that	“in-
habit several communities and also satisfy the informa-
tional requirements of each.” The AIR Project develops 
what Bowker and Star term “boundary infrastructures.” 
These	are	defined	as	“stable	regimes	managing	multiple	
boundary objects, allowing the necessary information 
to be accessed by multiple communities.” Also crucial 
from Bowker and Star, is the concept of “torque,” the 
condition	where	 biographies	 are	 “twisted	 in	 classifica-
tion systems” to arrive at painful lived experiences. One 
poignant example Bowker and Star present is the schism 
between societal and self-perception and the disruptive 
movement between or misapplication of categories, es-
pecially for people labeled as “black” or “colored,” in 
apartheid South Africa. The gap between self (or local 
community-based)	definition	of	an	individual’s	place	in	
a	classification	system	and	hegemonically	imposed	defi-
nition	of	classifications,	and	disarming	the	negative	re-
sults often arising from such phenomena, is a central to 
the critique performed by the systems highlighted in this 
paper. As opposed to computational identity applications 
that	are	based	on	standard,	static	classification	systems,	
the	 dynamically	 configurable,	 imaginatively	 grounded	
AIR Project identity systems are boundary infrastruc-
tures	that	allow	users	to	customize	their	user	profiles	and	
preferences for particular communities. 
3. The AIR Framework 
Based upon the cognitive and infrastructural approach 
above, and previous work in imaginative computation-
al discourse and identity construction (Harrell 2007, 
2008a), a brief summary of key aspects of the AIR Proj-
ect’s	 new	 constructs	 for	 implementing	 and	 analyzing	
computational identity follows. 
3.1 Shared Technical  
Underpinnings of Identity Applications  
A technical infrastructure-oriented means to compare 
computational	 identities	 is	 the	first	 pillar	 the	 approach	
developed in this project. Various computational identity 
applications such as social networking sites, avatar cre-
ation systems for virtual worlds, and games are imple-
mented using a limited and often overlapping set of tech-
niques. Fig. 2 describes, at a high level, the components 
that comprise the majority of widely used computational 
identity technologies (Harrell 2008b). 
The six components in Fig. 2 that commonly form the 
basis	 for	 avatar/character/profile	 construction	 can	 en-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 132
able dynamic and contingent models of social identity in 
digital environments as described in (Gee 2003). Under-
standing the reciprocities and overlaps between the tech-
nical means by which users stage their identities across 
digital media forms can enable more powerful customiz-
ability and cross-community communication facility in 
social identity systems. 
Fig. 2 Shared Technical Underpinnings of Computational 
Identity Applications
3.2 Cognitively Grounded Model of Computational 
Identity  
The cognitively grounded model of computational iden-
tity of the AIR Project is summarized in Fig. 3. It forms 
the second pillar of our approach. 
Fig. 3 A Cognitively Grounded Model of Computational 
Identity 
Our digital identity models serve to critique infrastruc-
tures	of	social	classification	that	can,	unfortunately,	often	
serve to reify naïve models of identity, and which do no 
capture the dynamic, constructive, and enacted identity 
phenomena encountered in everyday experience. This 
model is an analytical construct used to help to under-
stand the interplay between underlying infrastructures, 
such as the technical underpinning described above, and 
the subjective interpretation of digital identities. The 
utility of the model is that we can identify where schisms 
exist between a technical structure (e.g., a data structure 
specifying a player character as a string called a “priest” 
and an associated “heal” procedure that allows addition 
to an integer called “hit points) and a real world idealized 
cognitive	model	as	encoded	in	a	classification	infrastruc-
ture such as “occupation description” (e.g., the descrip-
tion of a priest perhaps as either someone versed in a 
metaphysical body of knowledge or as merely the facili-
tator of a particular type of institution). We can then con-
struct new infrastructures, using techniques such as sug-
gested in the AIR Project, that more closely align these 
structures and models in order to construct the hybrid 
of computationally afforded identities and real-world 
identities that James Gee calls the “projected identity” as 
shown in cognitively grounded AIR model (e.g., a player 
taking on the role of a priest in a computer role-playing 
game and trying to be helpful and supportive to her or 
his friends). The key here is that our understanding of 
both computational structures and the ways that users in-
terpret them is based in imaginative cognition processes 
such as conceptual categorization and blending. 
4. DefineMe – Chimera: A Critical 
Identity Construction Social Networking 
Application 
The	first	 system	 constructed	 using	 the	AIR	 theoretical	
framework is a Facebook application entitled DefineMe, 
the	first	version	of	which	is	called	Chimera. Specifically,	
we	implement	aspects	of	Lakoff’s	metonymic	idealized	
cognitive models for categorization to allow users to 
co-construct	 their	own	and	others’	avatars	as	boundary	
objects. (Lakoff 1987) The premise behind DefineMe is 
to	allow	users	to	define	each	others’	avatars	using	both	
commonplace and abstract metaphors. Users can append 
metadata	 to	 other	 peoples’	 profiles	 to	 drive	 dynamic	
generation of avatar images. The initial content domain 
consists of animal metaphors that can be mixed-and-
matched algorithmically. Animal metaphors are potent 
entrenched metaphors for human personality. (Turner 
1996) (e.g., sneaky weasels or docile sheep), however 
this animal metaphor-based version is only an initial ex-
periment. The model extends to more directly socially 
engaged categories such as social scenes, fashions, or 
movements. 
The DefineMe database is designed to be lightweight, 
dynamic, and extensible, while implementing categori-
cal relationships between members. When comparing 
profiles,	DefineMe is designed to match lexical items and 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  133
logical relations directly, or it can compare the structures 
of	profiles	following	insights	from	the	analogical	struc-
ture-mapping engine (SME) developed by Ken Forbus 
et. al. (Forbus 2001; Gentner 1983) The DefineMe – Chi-
mera application reported on here focuses on creating 
metaphorical projections as described above. The Defi-
neMe database relies on tags to create additional descrip-
tors for each category or member. For instance, one user 
could	describe	her	friend	as	a	‘lion’	(which	would	be	the	
member)	because	she	is	‘strong’	(which	is	the	tag).	An-
other user could add an additional tag, stating that she is 
a	‘lion’	because	she	is	‘carnivorous.’	These	tags	can	com-
prise	vertical	parent-child	links	(e.g.	a	‘lion’	is-an	‘ani-
mal’)	or	horizontal	implicit	links	(e.g.	in	another	user’s	
profile	a	‘lion’	is-an	‘Ethiopian	symbol,’	yet	the	system	
may	still	create	a	category	linked	by	the	concept	‘lion’).	
The	fact	that	users	define	other	users	has	the	potential	to	
both entertain and agitate, regardless it allows for critical 
inquiry into the phenomena echoing real-world labeling. 
Fig. 4 A screenshot of the DefineMe – Chimera facebook 
interface
Following the work of Eleanor Rosch cited in (Lakoff 
1987),	the	tagging	system	can	also	be	used	to	define	as-
pects	 of	 categories	 themselves.	 For	 instance,	 a	 ‘robin’	
tag	can	be	added	 to	 the	category,	 ‘birds,’	 to	define	 the	
prototype of that category. In this way, members can be-
long to multiple groups, but individuals can represent the 
prototypical members of groups. In this early version, 
each user is seen as a member of each assigned animal 
category as well. This membership allows the system to 
use an individual as a prototype stand-in for the category. 
For instance, rather than just labeling a friend as a lion, 
one could state that your friend, Emily, is like your friend 
Bobby because she is brave. The system can then take 
all	of	Bobby’s	attributes	and	apply	them	to	Emily’s	chi-
mera. This relatively lightweight structure avoids some 
of	the	pre-defined	categorization	built	into	many	social	
networking infrastructures, and has the potential to ex-
plore some of the more nuanced identity phenomena 
mentioned in the theoretical framework above. 
5. Identity Share: A Critical Identity 
Construction Social Networking 
Application 
Identity Share, a social networking site for “non-friends,” 
and	Daniel	Upton’s	MS	thesis	project	in	Digital	Media,	
is also developed under the umbrella of the AIR proj-
ect. The system allows for social networking by provid-
ing	users	with	facilities	to	construct	profiles,	follow	and	
comment upon other users, and perform game-like tasks 
that encourage users to consider exploring both like and 
different	profiles	of	others.	Identity Share offers a novel 
means of self-representation based upon open-ended cat-
egories	and	tags.	Standard	profile	models	that	typically	
include normative categories such as name, age, gender, 
location, and race are replaced with a customizable list 
that exists as a database, growing as more categories are 
added. Database consistency is maintained by giving us-
ers type ahead functionality when adding custom catego-
ries and by presenting existing categories in order from 
most common to least common. The database structure is 
based upon the same layout used by DefineMe – Chime-
ra. Users can select which categories are most important 
to them by indicating that they are primary to the user 
using checkboxes. By allowing for primary selection 
of categories, we consider the system to implementing 
centrality phenomena from the cognitive science theory 
above, i.e., “the idea that some members of a category 
may	be	‘better	examples’	of	that	category	than	others,”	
to	a	users	profile.	(Lakoff	1987)	This	means	that	a	user’s	
profile,	 as	a	collection	of	categories	 that	define	a	user,	
is no longer viewed as just a set of static characteristics 
that are true about this user, but rather as a complex set of 
characteristics	where	some	may	be	“truer”	or	more	defi-
nitional	to	the	user’s	self-conception.	To	take	this	even	
further, in a future implementation Identity Share could 
offer a ranking system for each category, thereby not 
only providing centrality, but a centrality gradience, “the 
idea that members (or sub-categories) which are clearly 
within the category boundaries may still be more or less 
central.” (Lakoff 1987) This offers a new dynamic to so-
cial	network	profiling	that	doesn’t	currently	exist	on	the	
popular social networking sites. 
6. Ethical and Humanistic Implications 
When social stakes are low, many people are inclined to 
reveal their baser selves. Indeed, in a project such as De-
fineMe – Chimera the potential for using the system to 
ridicule is quite apparent. Likewise, the ability to anony-
mously	follow	users’	web	usage	experiences	in	Identity 
Share offers a potential that may seem to verge on the 
voyeuristic. Yet, these potentially disempowering uses 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 134
are not seen as drawbacks of the systems. Each system is 
considered to be a culturally situated critical intervention, 
rather than a usability oriented productive application. In 
bringing to light more nuanced and imaginative identity 
phenomena, such as potential ostracism, prejudicial ex-
oticizing	of	the	other,	or	unflattering	labeling,	we	hope	to	
also provide the potential to disempower such phenom-
ena through dialogic engagement. These systems can 
be considered cultural productions, or digital media art 
projects, in the sense that they are provocative cultural 
interventions situated in an environment increasingly 
encroached upon by hegemonically enforced, often cor-
porate, models of user identity. As such, the systems suc-
ceed only to the degree that they engage users as evoca-
tive systems, inspire critical thought, and are construed 
as adequate for capturing personalities using archetypi-
cal avatars or conjure the sensation of experiencing the 
web	through	another’s	eyes.	Beyond	this,	however,	we	
see the systems as prototypes that suggest directions that 
could enhance the expressive and empowering potentials 
of productive, utilitarian, or commercial systems such 
as computer games and popular social networking sites 
with	features	such	as	self-definition	of	categories	and	de-
ployment of imaginative metaphor. 
Fig. 5 Two screenshots of the Identity Share interface 
Despite our provocative and critical interventionist 
stance, the systems are engineered to mitigate against 
abuse, and certainly distress of users is not our goal. 
Looking at the two systems consecutively, mitigating 
factors designed into the systems are as follows: 
DefineMe: Chimera Design Factors 
1. Users are only allowed to tag their Facebook 
“friends” who have added the application. 
2. Users have access to a limited database of animal-
types. 
3. Users must “opt-in” in order to receive a generated 
avatar. 
4. Users can “opt-out” at any time. 
5. Users’	database	entries	can	be	edited	by	moderators.	
6. Users have access to only a limited format for tag-
ging each other. 
7. Users	can	delete	entries	on	their	profiles	that	others	
have created. 
Together, we believe that these factors strongly help to 
avoid	 the	system’s	potential	 to	be	applied	 in	an	overly	
negative manner. It is a contract between friends to sign 
up for potential compliments, teasing, and, we believe, 
self and social insight. Ultimately, DefineMe – Chimera 
is intended to present users with a controlled experience 
of torqued identity. The fractured identity of a monstrous 
chimerical	representation	is	then,	an	accurate	reflection	
of the limitations of applying modular and discrete clas-
sifications	to	a	real	world	biography.	
Regarding Identity Share, mitigating design factors im-
plemented include the following: 
Identity Share Design Factors 
1. Users	can	create	their	own	self-classifications.	
2. Users	can	select	which	classifications	are	important	
to them. 
3. Users can avoid or utilize normative categories such 
as gender or occupation. 
4. Users	can	allow	or	disallow	the	system’s	tracking	of	
their web visitation paths at will. 
5. Users’	real	world	identities	are	kept	anonymous.	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  135
6. Users’	perceived	affordances	to	communicate	with	
one another are highly restricted. 
7. Users have full control to delete any of their data in 
the system. 
These factors were developed over the course of iterative 
refinement	of	 the	project	based	on	 informal	user	 feed-
back (mainly via open-ended interviews). The greatest 
challenge with the system was to allow for user gener-
ated categories while also pruning sparsely used and 
idiosyncratic database elements. A second challenge 
regarding anonymity and privacy is addressed by care-
ful controls such as articulated above, and by providing 
quite clear and prominent information on the nature of 
the site. Quite contrary to being a site to allow people 
to “spy” on others, it is an “opt-in” site oriented toward 
users	with	 a	 desire	 to	 share	 their	 personal	 styles,	 defi-
nitions, and web behaviors with one another. Finally, it 
is a system that is proposed as a balance between the 
limited and discrete, yet highly modular and structured, 
information structures provided by digital media and the 
continuous and transient, yet not computationally ame-
nable, phenomena of identity as shared in the real world. 
7. Conclusion 
The AIR Project examines the humanistic implications 
of emerging technologies by seriously considering the 
cultural effects of user identity within current digital 
media and the shared socio cognitive foundations that 
ground their construction. Following various accounts 
describing the procedural nature of the computational 
medium (Manovich 2001; Murray 1997), the AIR Proj-
ect looks at the underlying data structures and algorithms 
and how they implement cultural identity effects, and 
posits a technical framework for more deeply engaging 
identity	 semantics	 of	 classification	 and	 categorization.	
Technologies for implementing socially empowering or 
expressively critical and transformative experiences are 
necessary to create experiences to engage real identity 
social phenomena that lie at the center of so many of our 
political	debates	and	rich	critical	fictions.	
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge early assistance from the 
undergraduate researcher Richard Shemaka. Addition-
ally,	we	thank	Carl	DiSalvo	for	significant	input	on	Iden-
tity Share as	Daniel	Upton’s	co	advisor	with	Fox	Harrell. 
References 
Bowker, G. C. & Star, S. L. (1999). Sorting Things Out: 
Classification and Its Consequences, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA. 
Fauconnier, G. (1985). Mental Spaces: Aspects of Mean-
ing Construction in Natural Language, MIT Press/Brad-
ford Books, Cambridge. 
---- (2006).	‘Rethinking	Metaphor’,	in	Cambridge Hand-
book of Metaphor and Thought, ed. R. Gibbs, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, U.K. 
Forbus,	K.	D.	(2001).	‘Exploring	Analogy	in	the	Large’,	
in The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive 
Science, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Gee, J. P. (2003). What Video Games Have To Teach Us 
About Learning and Literacy, Palgrave Macmillan, New 
York City. 
Gentner, D. (1983). ‘Structure-mapping: A theoretical 
framework	for	analogy’,	Cognitive Science, vol. 7, no. 
2, pp. 155-70. 
Harrell, D. F. (2007). Theory and Technology for Com-
putational Narrative: An Approach to Generative and 
Interactive Narrative with Bases in Algebraic Semiotics 
and Cognitive Linguistics, Dissertation thesis, Univer-
sity of California, San Diego. 
---- (2008a). ‘Algebra of Identity: Skin of Wind, Skin of 
Streams,	Skin	of	Shadows,	Skin	of	Vapor’,	 in	Critical 
Digital Studies, eds A. Kroker & M. Kroker, University 
of Toronto Press, Toronto. 
----(2008b). Digital Metaphors for Phantom Selves: 
Computation, Mathematics, and Identity in Specula-
tive and Fantastic Fiction and Gaming paper presented 
to The 29th International Conference on the Fantastic in 
the Arts, Orlando, FL. 
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the Wild, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
---- (2000). Distributed Cognition, paper presented to 
International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral 
Sciences, University of California, San Diego. 
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: 
What Categories Reveal about the Mind, University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. 
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the 
Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 136
Thought, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Lave, J. & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Le-
gitimate periferal participation, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, U.K. 
Manovich, L. (2001). The Language of New Media, MIT 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Murray, J. H. (1997). Hamlet on the Holodeck: The Fu-
ture of Narrative in Cyberspace, Free Press, New York. 
Santa Ana, O. (2002). Brown Tide Rising: Metaphors of 
Latinos in Contemporary American Public Discourse, 
University of Texas Press, Austin. 
Turner, M. (1996). The Literary Mind: The Origins of 
Thought and Language, Oxford UP, New York; Oxford. 
