Design as a Hermeneutic 
Process: Thinking Through 
Making from Book History to 
Critical Design
Stan Ruecker 
University of Alberta 
sruecker@ualberta.ca
Alan Galey 
University of Toronto 
alan.galey@utoronto.ca
In what ways can the process of designing be used simultaneously for creating an artifact and as a pro-
cess of critical interpretation? Can new forms of digital 
objects, such as interface components and visualiza-
tion tools, contain arguments that advance knowledge 
about the world? This paper addresses those questions, 
first	by	exploring	theoretical	affinities	shared	by	recent	
design and book history scholarship, and then by con-
necting those theories to the emerging practice of peer-
reviewing digital objects in scholarly contexts. The 
paper concludes by suggesting that new forms of schol-
arly creation, especially those emerging from the digital 
humanities, need to be understood within the epistemic 
contexts that design and book history have concurrently 
been modelling in recent years. 
One longstanding tradition of design is to understand 
it as an invisible handmaiden to content, where form 
follows function, and the typography in a book, for ex-
ample, becomes transparent to the reader (Bringhurst 
2005). Good design in this school of thought is design 
that goes unnoticed. An alternative tradition treats design 
as creative expression, where the hand of the designer is 
evident and we see a style that can be associated with 
the person responsible (Rand 1985). A related variation, 
sometimes referred to as “critical design,” treats design 
as	a	rejection	of	the	first	tradition,	resulting	in	typogra-
phy	that	is	intentionally	difficult	to	read,	and	chairs	that	
no one can sit in (Dunne 2005). All three of these ap-
proaches to design have their place, and we would argue 
that each of them can legitimately be understood as a 
form of interpretation. However, we would also propose 
that there is another distinct possibility, where one of the 
goals of the designer has been deliberately to carry out 
an interpretive act while in the course of producing an 
artifact. As Lev Manovich has publicly phrased it (2007) 
“a prototype is a theory.” One of the functions of the ar-
tifact then becomes to communicate that interpretation, 
and to make it productively contestable.
Manovich’s	assertion	has	a	close	counterpart	in	Bernard	
Cerquiglini’s	 claim	 for	 textual	 scholarship	 that	 “every	
edition is a theory” (1999, p. 79). The symmetry of these 
two statements extends to much of design and book his-
tory	as	cognate	but	often	separate	fields.	Yet	design	has	
become a preoccupation in book history since the 1980s, 
especially	 following	D.F.	McKenzie’s	 influential	work	
on the sociology of texts (McKenzie 1999; McGann 
1991), which emphasizes both the centrality of physi-
cal design and manufacture, and the importance of col-
laboration between multiple agents in the construction 
of meaning in books and other textual artifacts. This 
attention to the design of objects as “expressive form” 
(McKenzie 1999, p. 9) is poised to extend into the study 
of digital objects, including electronic literature and 
video games. Although McKenzie suggested a natural 
extension	 of	 bibliography’s	 analytical	 and	 interpretive	
methods	to	texts	in	all	media,	including	film,	sound	re-
cording, and electronic text, the digital object presents 
challenges to hermeneutic assumptions carried forward 
from the print-based bibliography of the past century. 
Anthony Dunne describes the interdisciplinary chal-
lenge well when he asks “How can we discover analogue 
complexity in digital phenomena without abandoning 
the rich culture of the physical, or superimposing the 
known and comfortable onto the new and alien?” (2005, 
p. 17). In contrast to digital text production and software 
design,	we	have	a	 fairly	well-defined	understanding	of	
the traditional roles of non-authorial agents in print and 
manuscript book production, such as scribes, binders, 
typographers, compositors, correctors, and illustrators. 
“The sociology of texts” names an interpretive orienta-
tion	which	embraces	 these	 agents’	 contributions	 to	 the	
traditionally authorial process of meaning-making. In 
essence, then, book history has embraced design as a 
hermeneutic process, but has done so using a print-based 
vocabulary inherited from bibliography. The challenge 
now is to understand the kinds of agency that produce 
meaning in digital objects, and to appreciate the criti-
cal potential of digital objects in terms limited neither to 
print culture nor to the human-factors utilitarianism of 
industrial design (Dunne, 1999, p. 21-42).
By	understanding	how	fields	like	book	history	take	the	
design decisions embedded in physical artifacts as inter-
pretive	objects,	we	can	begin	 to	 see	digital	humanists’	
creation of new digital artifacts as interpretive acts. We 
believe that the theoretical questions and convergences 
described above are strongly relevant to the emerging 
area of peer-review, evaluation, and authorship status 
of digital objects. Just as the boundary between digital 
documents and software applications has become less 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  241
distinct due to web technologies, so has the boundary 
between traditional scholarly monographs and digital 
objects such as the “interactive media submissions” 
solicited by Digital Humanities Quarterly. By recog-
nizing that digital objects – such as interfaces, games, 
tools, electronic literature, and text visualizations – may 
contain arguments subjectable to peer-review, digital hu-
manities scholars are assuming a perspective very simi-
lar to that of book historians who study the sociology of 
texts. In this sense, the concept of design has developed 
beyond pure utilitarianism or creative expressiveness to 
take on a status equal to critical inquiry, albeit with a 
more complicated relation to materiality and authorship. 
If we take seriously the suggestion that a digital object 
can embody an argument, then it should be possible to 
apply to digital objects some of the standard criteria for 
reviewing arguments. For Booth et al. (2008), the three 
key components of a good thesis topic is that it is con-
testable, defensible, and substantive. To be contestable, 
the thesis must be trying to convince people of a position 
that not everyone already believes. To be defensible, it 
must be possible, given the right kind of argument or 
evidence, that members of a reasonable audience could 
be convinced to change their minds. To be substantive, 
the argument must be worth the time and effort it takes 
for the writer to make it and the reader to engage with it. 
For a prototype, we propose that contestability might 
reasonably consist of the inclusion somewhere in the in-
terface of either an old affordance, previously seen in 
other interfaces, but now done in a new way, or else a 
new affordance – one not previously seen. Defensibil-
ity might equate to user studies of performance or pref-
erence. For old affordances handled in a new way, the 
studies could be comparative. For new affordances, 
comparison is not really possible, but there are strategies 
that can be adopted, such as looking at what we have 
elsewhere called “affordance strength” (Paredes-Olea et 
al. 2008, Ruecker 2006). Whether or not a prototype idea 
is substantive is somewhat harder to determine. This is, 
however, equally true for conventional scholarship. 
The question of authorship is another factor to consider 
in the adoption of peer review of digital objects. Unlike 
research results in the sciences, arts research is still fre-
quently published by a single author. However, in the 
case of digital objects, it is rare for a single person to be 
responsible for the entire process of conceptualization, 
design, development, and testing (Sinclair et al. 2003). 
At	 what	 point	 is	 a	 contribution	 significant	 enough	 to	
warrant the digital equivalent of authorship? Who should 
be	first	author	–	the	person	who	had	the	original	idea,	or	
the person who did the bulk of the design, or the person 
who did the programming? These are questions which, 
if asked within a book-history context, would resonate 
with	Roger	Stoddard’s	often-quoted	assertion	 that	“au-
thors do not write books. Books are not written at all. 
They are manufactured by scribes and others artisans, by 
mechanics and other engineers, and by printing presses 
and other machines” (1987, p. 4; emphasis in original). 
Peer review of digital objects thus involves digital hu-
manities in a kind of sociology of texts with respect to 
the re-evaluation of authorship, while also encountering 
new aspects of digital design such as fragmentariness, 
modularity, and interoperability.
Ideas about design thus enter the digital humanities from 
a number of directions, each bringing certain disciplin-
ary predispositions with them. The goal of this paper is 
a synthesis of design and book history perspectives on 
the ethos of “thinking through making,” which informs 
much digital humanities research and pedagogy gener-
ally. The digital humanities must not lose sight of the 
design	of	artifacts	as	a	critical	act,	one	that	may	reflect	
insights into materials and advance an argument about 
that	 artifact’s	 role	 in	 the	 world.	 Design	 thus	 provides	
a lynchpin for theoretical questions that unite different 
fields.
References
Booth, Wayne G., Gregory G. Colomb, Joseph M. 
Williams. (2008). The Craft of Research. 3rd Edition. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bringhurst, R. (2005). The Elements of Typographic 
Style. 3rd ed. Vancouver: Hartley & Marks.
Cerquiglini, B. (1999). In Praise of the Variant: A Criti-
cal History of Philology. Trans Betsy Wing. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Dunne, A. (2005). Hertzian Tales: Electronic Products, 
Aesthetic Experience, and Critical Design. 2nd ed. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Manovich, Lev. (2007). Q&A session at the Digital Hu-
manities (DH) 2007 conference. University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign.
McGann, J.J. (1991). The Textual Condition. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
McKenzie. D.F. (1999). Bibliography and the Sociology 
of Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Paredes-Olea, Mariana, Stan Ruecker, Carlos Fioren-
tino, and Fraser Forbes. (2008). “Using an Affordance 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 242
Strength Approach to Study the Possible Redeployment 
of Designs for Decision Support Visualization.” Paper 
presented at the 9th Advances in Qualitative Methods 
Conference 2008. Banff, Canada. October 8-11, 2008.
Rand, Paul. (1985). Paul Rand: A Designer’s Art. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Ruecker, Stan. (2006). “Proposing an Affordance 
Strength Model to Study New Interface Tools.” Paper 
presented at the Digital Humanities 2006 conference, at 
the Sorbonne, Paris, France. July 5-9, 2006.
Stoddard, R. (1987). Morphology and the Book from an 
American Perspective, Printing History, 9: 4. 
Sinclair, Stéfan, John Bradley, Stephen Ramsay, 
Geoffrey Rockwell, Ray Siemens & Jean-Claude 
Guédon. (2003). “Peer Review of Humanities Comput-
ing Software.” Panel at The Association for Computers 
and the Humanities / The Association for Literary and 
Linguistic Computing (ALLC/ACH): The 2003 Joint In-
ternational Conference. Athens, Georgia. May 29-June 
2, 2008. Draft articles online at http://tada.mcmaster.ca/
Main/PeerReviewCluster
