Digital Curiosities: Resource 
Creation via Amateur 
Digitisation 
Melissa Terras 
University College London 
m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
Introduction
Digitisation, “the conversion of an analog signal or code into a digital signal or code” (Lee 2002, 3) is 
now commonplace in most memory institutions, as digi-
tal representations of cultural and historical documents, 
artefacts, and images are created and delivered to users, 
generally online. The exponential growth in digitisation 
projects towards the close of the 20th Century, along with 
the establishment of guides to good practice and tech-
nical guidelines, has meant that “Countless millions of 
pounds, dollars, francs and marks [have been] ploughed 
into digital projects that have involved the conversion 
of library, museum and archive collections” (Lee 2002, 
160).   Much of the early academic debates regarding 
the purpose, merit, and scope of digitisation are now re-
solved as institutions create high quality resources for 
the general user and academic researcher alike (Hughes 
2002, Deegan and Tanner 2002). As a result
Digitisation is not a per-se research issue but is part of a 
wider context related to the information society and the 
effective use of the digital content by cultural institutions 
(Minerva 2003, xxiii). 
However, an area seldom considered in academic lit-
erature is the creation of digital resources by amateurs. 
Although hitherto ignored by information professionals, 
recent developments in Web 2.0 technologies means that 
museums, libraries and archives are now re-considering 
their relationship with users and the general public, both 
in the use of digital collections and how users can con-
tribute to an increasingly rich digital resource environ-
ment.  This paper assesses the scope of online resources 
created outside institutional boundaries by keen indi-
viduals who wish to participate in digitising our cultural 
heritage, providing an overview and conceptualising the 
potential contribution that can be made by amateur digi-
tisation.
Context
The rise of online “museums” created by amateur enthu-
siasts, generally containing digital images of holdings 
and artefacts, is a seldom considered but growing phe-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 276
nomenon. Amateur online collections have appropriated 
a variety of technologies, from static HTML, to the host-
ing opportunities afforded by online, new media, social 
networking	sites	 such	as	www.flickr.com.	 	 In	addition,	
with memory institutions appropriating Web 2.0 tech-
nologies themselves – such as tagging, and encouraging 
user feedback and involvement – amateur enthusiasts are 
now being encouraged to contribute to the online pres-
ence of established institutions.  Online “museum” mate-
rial resulting from amateur digitisation projects can pro-
vide a rich source of primary resources for both scholars 
and the general public, and although this has been all 
but ignored until recently by the Library, Archive, Cul-
tural Heritage, and Arts and Humanities communities, 
its democratising nature is worthy of further consider-
ation.  “On and on it goes – acres of the cyberworld full 
of ephemera.  What else is out there?”  (Gorman, 2003, 
p. 11).
It is acknowledged that “cyberspace is littered with the 
productions of ignorant, semi-literate, and/or crazed in-
dividuals”, (Gorman 2003, p. 14) and in many cases, 
these online collections function as 21st Century cabi-
nets of curiosities. They can be viewed as amusing, ec-
centric, or even worrying obsessions with a particular 
type of ephemera which the rest of the world has chosen 
to leave undocumented, providing a “an individual, a 
“netizen” …[with the] means of expression for anyone 
with minimal technical skills but abundant passion and 
dedication” (Harden 1998). The Guardian newspaper de-
scribed the Museum of Online Museums (http://coudal.
com/moom/) thus: “The internet has brought advance-
ments, but nowhere has it been more successful than in 
the	field	of	meaningless	rubbish.	Here,	vast	swathes	of	
tat are housed in one handy place for easy navigation” 
(2007, 31). Just because the creator describes their col-
lection as a museum does not mean to say it functions as 
we expect of a memory institution, whatever that may 
be. 
However, the content of these online sources ranges 
from the amusing, to serious attempts at providing in-
formation resources to both scholarly and amateur re-
searchers which are just not available anywhere else, 
being useful even if they lack the institutional backing 
and	guidance	of	their	official	online	counterparts.	These	
“museums” can vary from the ramshackle and quirky to 
the glossy and guidelines-compliant documentation of 
ephemera which established institutions are either not 
interested, able, or willing to catalogue, digitise, and 
provide	online:	“one	librarian’s	ephemeron	is	another’s	
invaluable cultural resource” (Gorman 2003, p. 14). 
The Museum of Online Museums maintains a registry 
of	such	creations,	 including	Devil’s	Rope:	The	Barbed	
Wire Museum (http://www.barbwiremuseum.com/in-
dex.htm),	 the	Museum	 of	 Menstruation	 and	Women’s	
Health (www.mum.org), and Total Rewind, “the virtual 
museum of vintage vcrs” (http://www.totalrewind.org/): 
all award winning, and featuring exhaustive documenta-
tion and digitised source material not available anywhere 
else.  Additionally, many amateur digitisers are creating 
“pools” of digitised objects utilising image-hosting sites 
such	as	www.flickr.com	as	a	platform,	creating	exhaus-
tive documentation of, say, vintage dressmaking patterns 
(http://www.flickr.com/groups/vintagepatterns/pool/),	or	
book cover artwork of cheap paperbacks from the mid 
twentieth	 century	 (http://www.flickr.com/groups/paper-
backs/pool/).  
Memory institutions themselves are beginning to ex-
periment with Web 2.0 environments, asking the general 
public to interact with their digitised material through 
social tagging, bookmarking, and commenting (http://
www.steve.museum/). A forward-thinking project at 
Oxford University, the First World War Digital Poetry 
Archive (http://www.oucs.ox.ac.uk/ww1lit/), has taken 
this one step further by successfully asking the general 
public to come forward with their ephemera to include in 
the archive.  Harnessing the energy, passion and interest 
of amateur digitisation is of clear interest to the cultural 
and heritage sector.  What do we know about both the 
creators and users of amateur digitisation projects? What 
can we learn from this?
There has never been an over-arching academic con-
sideration of amateur digitisation projects.  This paper 
surveys the hitherto ignored phenomenon of virtual 
and online museums and digitised ephemera created by 
amateur enthusiasts, to ascertain the motivation, scope, 
implementation, perception, and usefulness of such ac-
tivity.  Is this predominantly meaningless “tat”, or are 
virtual collections created by amateurs used, useful, and 
worthy of further consideration? By what criteria can we 
judge whether an amateur digitisation project is success-
ful?  How can memory institutions harness the energy 
and time devoted in creating these online resources? 
Methodology
First, the literature on digitisation was reviewed to as-
certain whether amateur contributions had been studied. 
Second, a hundred stand alone, self-confessed “vir-
tual museums” were reviewed to indicate the coverage, 
scope, and purpose of their collections.  Likewise, groups 
and	pools	on	flickr	were	reviewed.		Memory	institutions	
currently encouraging user interaction via Web 2.0 tech-
nologies were surveyed to ascertain the extent of user 
involvement.   Third, ten creators of amateur websites 
were interviewed to gain their insight regarding purpose, 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  277
coverage and use of their material.  Finally, a survey was 
carried out with Arts and Humanities academics, to ask 
if they had every used, referenced, depended on, or even 
come across useful online digitised material provided 
beyond institutional boundaries.  
Findings
The study will report fully in Spring 2009, but prelimi-
nary	 findings	 indicate	 that	 successful	 standalone	 vir-
tual amateur museums – those providing novel detailed 
content unavailable elsewhere – tend to focus around a 
particular	niche	subject	such	as	histories	of	specific	tech-
nologies, or socially taboo interests. Another popular 
area is the digitisation of family history and genealogical 
material. Those utilising image hosting facilities, such 
as	 flickr,	 unsurprisingly	 tend	 to	 focus	 on	 image	 based	
material to facilitate discussion of the history of graphic 
design and illustration. 
The	digitisation	is	carried	out	as	a	not-for-profit	hobby:	
the interaction with other enthusiasts and viewers afford-
ed by using Internet technologies gives a sense of ca-
maraderie and often encourages rigorous debate between 
enthusiasts keen on properly documenting their chosen 
topic.  This enthusiasm is carried over to established 
memory institutions which offer amateurs the means to 
contribute via web 2.0 technologies.
There has been very little investigation or understanding 
of how these amateur digitised collections are used.  Cre-
ators are generally aware of usage statistics, and most 
can	 provide	 examples	 where	 specific,	 detailed	 queries	
from interested researchers have been answered through 
their collections. Academic researchers are happy to turn 
to these collections when they provide information not 
available elsewhere. 
Conclusion
Enthusiastic digitisation by amateurs, a phenomenon 
previously ignored by information professionals, is pro-
viding a rich source of online cultural heritage content 
which often documents areas not covered via traditional 
institutions.  The energy and zeal displayed by amateur 
digitisers is worthy of further consideration, as amateur 
collections often complement existing collections, pro-
viding an alternative free discussion space for enthusi-
asts. Web 2.0 technologies present great potential in link-
ing the amateur with the institution, extending the reach 
and scope of digitised cultural heritage.  
References
Deegan, M. and Tanner, S. (2002), Digital Futures: 
Strategies for the Information Age. Digital Futures Se-
ries (London, Library Association Publishing). 
Gorman, M. (2003), “Cataloguing in an Electronic Age”, 
in Intner, S. S., Tseng, S. C., Larsgaard, M. L. (eds.) 
(2003), Electronic Cataloguing: AACR2 and Metadata 
for Serials and Monographs, (Binghamton, The Haworth 
Press), 5- 17. 
Guardian (2007), “Web Watch”, The Guardian, Guide 
Magazine, October 20 2007, 31. 
Harden, M. (1998). “Web Graphics: Art on the Net”. 
Museums and the Web Conference 1998, Toronto, On-
tario, Canada, April 22-25, 1998. http://www.archimuse.
com/mw98/papers/harden/harden_paper.html
Hughes, L. (2004), Digitizing collections: strategic is-
sues for the information manager (London: Facet Pub-
lishing). 
Lee, S. (2002), Digital Imaging, a Practical Handbook 
(London, Facet Publishing).
Minerva (2003), “Summary of Progress”. Coordinating 
digitisation in Europe. Progress report of the National 
Representatives Group, European Commission, The 
Information Society Directorate-General, <http://www.
minervaeurope.org/publications/globalreport/global-
rep2002.htm>.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 278
