Digital and Virtual Architecture: 
a review of two projects
Nicoletta Adamo-Villani 
Purdue University 
nadamovi@purdue.edu
1.  Introduction
During the past four decades digital technologies have had a major impact on architecture and have com-
pletely revolutionized the way architecture is designed 
and visualized. The ability to digitally manipulate archi-
tectural	components	and	to	consider	all	possible	configu-
rations in advance has provided new, alternate means to 
design architecture (Bermudez & Klinger, 2003).  If we 
observe some examples of  “digitally designed architec-
ture”, such as the Hadid nuragic and contemporary art 
museum in Cagliari (Zaha Hadid, 2007) and Frank O. 
Gehry’s	Experience	Music	Project	(O.	Gehry,	2000)	we	
note that these unique architectural designs could be cre-
ated only in a computer-mediated environment. 
Digital representation has proven to be an excellent tool 
for the communication of design ideas (Mohan, 2003). 
Instead of symbolic representations, static renderings 
and time consuming physical models, technologies such 
as photorealistic 3D animation have made it possible to 
create convincing renderings and walkthroughs that can 
be easily understood by non-specialists (Uddin, 1999). 
In addition, a completely new form of computer-based 
architecture has recently emerged: Virtual Architecture. 
Maher	 defines	Virtual	Architecture	 as	 an	 ‘..interactive,	
networked spatial environment designed using the met-
aphor of physical architecture, from which it  inherits 
many	 visual	 and	 spatial	 characteristics’	 (Maher	 et	 al.,	
2000). The main purpose of Virtual Architecture is to 
provide an electronic location for people to socialise, 
work, and learn in the same way physical architecture 
does. Because Virtual Architecture uses the metaphor 
of cities, buildings and rooms, it can be designed by ar-
chitects and then constructed by computer graphics pro-
grammers (Maher et al., 1999).
In this paper we describe and discuss two architectural 
projects that were developed entirely in a computer-
based	 environment.	 The	 first	 is	 a	 3D	 animation-based	
project whose goal was to design and visualize a vi-
sionary new city.  The second project is an example of 
Virtual Architecture and its objective was to design and 
develop an online virtual world.
2.  “Samarkand on the Euxine”: a Digital 
Architecture project
The objective of the project was to design and visualize 
a new city in the Republic of Turkey near the present site 
of Istanbul. The city would serve as a satellite city that 
would provide aid in the event of a catastrophic earth-
quake. Devastating earthquakes have visited Istanbul 
in the past at intervals varying from 300 to 100 years 
and the next one is due any moment. The Metropolitan 
Municipality of Istanbul is planning for response to the 
dreaded event in many ways. One of these is the devel-
opment of an entirely new satellite city.
The vision of the city was created at the Envision Center 
at Purdue University by a team of graduate and under-
graduate students led by the author and by a faculty in 
Purdue Civil Engineering. The team chose to use pho-
torealistic 3D animation technology because of its abil-
ity to represent design in an intuitive, concrete way. 
The main advantage of 3D photorealistic animation 
over	 CAD	 visualizations	 is	 ‘representational	 fidelity’.	
Representational	 fidelity	 refers	 to	 the	 degree	 of	 real-
ism of the rendered 3-D objects and the degree of real-
ism provided by temporal changes to these objects. 3D 
animation-based visualizations include true-to-life rep-
licas of buildings, displayed with accurate perspective, 
occlusion, photographic-quality materials, lights, and 
motion. When making a presentation supplemented with 
a photorealistic 3D visualization, architects and design-
ers can convey their visions clearly to those who need 
to understand them in order to make decisions.  In this 
case, it is hoped that the powerful 3D imagery produced 
will convince the decision-makers at the Metropolitan 
Municipality of Istanbul to act with the needed alacrity.
The project presented many challenges because of its 
complexity, the scale of  the area to be visualized (40,000 
acres), and the aggressive production timeline. The over-
all city plan was developed with the goal of creating a 
green city with an advanced cyber infrastructure dedicat-
ed to communications, security, and recycling. The plan 
includes a business district, research and government 
centers, modern museums, concert halls, theaters, hos-
pitals, retail centers, exhibition halls, buildings for social 
functions, a sports center, and a hotel district. Figure 1 
shows a partial 3D map of the city.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 50
 
Figure 1. 3D map; “Selcuk Center”
The design started with a low-detail city plan in the form 
of	 a	 .dwg	AUTOCAD	file.	The	majority	of	 the	design	
decisions were made directly in the 3D software as sec-
tions of the city were being visualized.  The main design 
goal was to create a modern city that takes advantage 
of state-of-the-art building techniques and, at the same 
time, includes architectural elements reminiscent of the 
Byzantine and Ottoman Empires. This design theme 
is clearly evident in Figure 1 which shows a cluster of 
earthquake-resistant buildings arranged in the shape of 
the “Selcuk star”, a classical Ottoman symbol.
All buildings were designed, modeled and textured in 
MAYA 8.5 software. Global illumination and radiosity 
were used to give an accurate depiction of real life lights 
and environments; photo realistically rendered human 
figures,	vehicles	and	landscape	elements	were	added	in	
order to accentuate the realistic look of the visualiza-
tion and provide a sense of scale. The animation can 
be viewed at:  http://www.tacc.utexas.edu/~jwozniak/
TG08/13/13.html“
3. The 21st Century World”:  a  Virtual 
Architecture project
The “21st Century World” is a collaborative project be-
tween Purdue University and Educate for tomorrow 
(EforT, Hawaii). Its objective is the development of a 
3D online virtual city designed to allow students and the 
general public to interactively explore nanotechnology 
enhanced products of the 21st Century. Users can travel 
through the city, enter buildings, manipulate objects, and 
interact with 3D avatars to learn about nanotechnology. 
The virtual city includes buildings with nanoenhanced 
materials and self cleaning windows that absorb energy 
from sun light. It features cleaner and safer mass trans-
portation, alternate fuel stations, cars with self-repairing 
body-paint scratches, and buildings that grow crops in-
doors. 
       
 
 
Figure 2. Renderings showing part of the 21st Century 
World and interior of train station with detail of water and 
dirt repellent floor
The futuristic city was designed entirely in 3D STUDIO 
MAX 9.0 software by a team of architects and nano-sci-
ence	experts	(figure	2	shows	two	renderings	of	the	city).	
The models were exported from 3D STUDIO MAX as 
VRML	files	and	the	interactive	application	is	currently	
being	 programmed.	 Images	 and	 fly-trough	 animation	
can be accessed at: http://www2.tech.purdue.edu/cgt/i3/
nanofactor/web%20site/index.htm
4. Discussion
The project described in section 2 demonstrates how 
digital technologies such as photorealistic 3D modeling 
and	 animation	 can	 benefit	 architectural	 visualization	
and design. The primary advantage of 3D photorealistic 
modeling lies in the ability to visualize design in more 
concrete terms. The usefulness of maps and architectural 
drawings can be limited, particularly to the non-special-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  51
ist, whereas a photorealistic virtual model can enable de-
cision makers and the general public to see the aspects of 
a project from every possible angle. ‘As a result, it can 
increase the level of feedback and constructive respons-
es	before	taking	any	financial	risks.’	(Wilson,	1998).	In	
our case, clear communication and risk mitigation were 
the most compelling drivers of incorporating 3D pho-
torealistic modeling/animation into the project. Consid-
ering the cost, scale and scope of projects like the one 
described in the paper, producing a photorealistic virtual 
model is a  good investment because it can speed up de-
cision making processes, streamline approvals, and re-
duce costly change orders (Bouchlaghem, 2005). 
Moreover, the ability to interactively experiment with 
a variety of shapes and forms and see the results being 
visualized	 in	 real-time	 time	are	 tremendous	benefits	of	
3D modeling and animation technology.  Samarkand on 
the Euxine has received very positive feedback from the 
officials	at	the	Municipality	of	Istanbul	and	has	therefore	
demonstrated that effective architectural designs can be 
created entirely in a computer-mediated environment. 
The author agrees with (Bermudez & Klinger, 2003) 
who argue that digital thinking is indeed architectural 
thinking.
The project described in section 3 is an example of virtu-
al place that draws on knowledge of architectural design. 
Maher argues that most virtual environments are created 
by programmers rather than designed by architects and, 
as a result, we are in the “era of vernacular virtual archi-
tecture” (Maher et al., 2000).  In the development of   the 
21st Century World, provision of functionality and geo-
metric description of the space were considered equally 
important factors. The objective was not only to create a 
highly interactive and functional environment, but also 
to design a city based on the principles of good urban 
design. In particular we considered the principle of ‘Leg-
ibility	and	Wayfinding’	 to	help	 the	users	 in	orientation	
and navigation tasks; the principle of ‘Character and 
Meaning’	 to	 help	 the	 participants	 recognize	 and	 value	
the differences between one area and another; and the 
principle	of	‘Order	and	Incident’	(e.g.,	balancing	consist-
ency and variety) to provide the users with an appealing 
environment that promotes curiosity and motivates them 
to continue to explore (Barnett, 1982) (Larice & Mac-
Donald, 2007). 27 users have evaluated the 21st Century 
World so far. Their feedback on usability and appeal has 
been	extremely	positive,	thus	confirming	the	importance	
of implementing architectural and urban design princi-
ples in the design of virtual places. 
References
Barnett, J. (1982). An Introduction to Urban Design. 
Harper & Row, New York .
Bermudez, J. & Klinger, K. (editors) (2003). Digital 
Technology and Architecture - White Paper.  ACADIA 
2003.  http://www.acadia.org/ACADIA_whitepaper.pdf. 
Bouchlaghem, D., Shang, H., Whyte, J., Ganah, A. 
(2005).  Visualisation in architecture, engineering and 
construction (AEC).  Automation in Construction, 14, 
287– 295.
Frank.O.Gehry’s	Experience	Music	Project.		http://www.
arcspace.com/architechts/gehry/emp_n/
Larice, M. & MacDonald, E. (editors) (2007). The Ur-
ban Design Reader. Routledge, New York London.
Maher, M.L., Simoff, S., Gu, N., Lau, K.H. (2000). De-
signing Virtual Architecture. Proceedings of CAADRIA 
2000, Singapore.
Maher, M.L., Gu, N., Li, F. (1999). Visualisation and 
Object Design in Virtual Architecture Proceedings of 
CAADRIA 1999, Sydney, Australia.
Nethra Mettuchetty Ram Mohan (2003).  Emerging 
Technologies in Architectural Visualization – Implemen-
tation  Strategies for Practice. MS Thesis - School of Ar-
chitecture Mississippi State. http://sun.library.msstate.
edu/ETD-db/theses/available/etd-04072003-164447/un-
restricted/nethra_thesis.pdf.
Uddin, M. S. (1999). Digital Architecture. McGraw- Hill
Wilson, J.D. (1998). ModelCity Philadelphia Elevates 
GIS to the Next Level. Professional Surveyor, 18(2).
Zaha Hadid nuragic and contemporary art museum in 
Cagliari, Italy.  http://www.arcspace.com/architects/had-
id/cagliari/cagliari.html. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 52
