Digital Lives: how people create, 
manipulate and store their 
personal digital archives
Peter Williams
University College London 
peter.williams@ucl.ac.uk	
Ian Rowlands 
University College London 
i.rowlands@ucl.ac.uk	
Jeremy John 
British Library 
Jeremy.John@bl.uk
Introduction
The personal archives of scholars and other eminent people have long been kept in repositories such as 
the British Library, and include correspondence, note-
books, drafts of published papers, photographs etc. 
Needless to say, in recent years these collections have 
become	ever	more	‘digital’,	as	individuals	are	capturing	
and storing increasing amounts of digital information 
about or for themselves, including documents, portfo-
lios of work, digital images, blogs, personal web pages 
and audio and video recordings (Summers & John 2001; 
Beagrie, 2005; John, 2005; Thomas & Martin, 2006). 
Not only the media and formats but also the contents of 
works created by individuals are changing. For example 
in	the	history	of	science,	laboratory	and	field	notebooks	
are changing drastically as research councils move to-
wards supporting more standardised forms of recording 
e-science. We need to understand and address these is-
sues now if future historians, biographers and curators 
are to be able to make sense of life in the early twenty-
first	 century.	There	 is	 a	 real	 danger	 otherwise	 that	we	
will lose whole swathes of personal, family and cultural 
memory.
Personal information collections and management have 
been the focus of attention of researchers for many years, 
particularly	in	the	field	of	Human-Computer	Interaction	
(for an early example, see Malone, 1983). However, the 
rapid rise in digital applications and storage capacity has 
both	stimulated	interest	in	this	field	(see,	e.g.	Kaye	et.	al,	
2006, Jones, 2007; Bruce et al, 2004) and also opened 
up a new research area within it directed at personal dig-
ital archives, a term used here to refer to these informal, 
diverse, and expanding memory collections created or 
acquired and accumulated and maintained by individuals 
and belonging to them, rather than to their institution or 
other place of work. It is the focus of a major study ‘Dig-
ital	Lives’,	which	will	be	the	subject	of	the	presentation.
Digital Lives research project
The Digital Lives research project is being led by the 
British	Library	and	funded	by	the	UK’s	Arts	and	Human-
ities Research Council, focusing on such collections and 
their relationship with research repositories. It brings 
together expert curators and practitioners in digital pres-
ervation, digital manuscripts, literary collections, web-
archiving, history of science, and oral history from the 
British Library with researchers in the School of Library, 
Archive and Information Studies at University College 
London and The Centre for Information Technology 
and Law at the University of Bristol.  The project aims 
to explore how individuals manage their personal dig-
ital archives, in order to inform curators and archivists 
who will be entrusted with the personal collections of 
eminent people that will be left to them in future. We are 
seeking to clarify our understanding of an enormously 
complex and changing environment, engage with major 
issues, and evaluate radical new practices and tools that 
could assist curators in the future. 
The initial phase of the project is complete, and will 
form the backdrop to the presentation. For this, we used 
in-depth interviews to explore the views, practices and 
experiences of a number of eminent individuals in the 
fields	of	politics,	the	arts	and	the	sciences,	plus	an	equal	
number of young or mid-career professional practitio-
ners whose works and personal archives may be of in-
terest to future scholars. Questions covered the history 
of	the	interviewee’s	experience	with	computers	and	ICT,	
training	undertaken,	manipulating	files,	backing	up	and	
transfer, collaborative work, extent and nature of any 
digital archive and the motivation behind decisions to 
keep or discard documents. Attitudes and perceptions of 
digital artifacts generally were also elicited.
This	phase	of	 the	research	(the	preliminary	findings	of	
which have been reported by Williams et al, 2008) elic-
ited a fascinating variety of experiences, behaviours and 
approaches, ranging from the poet who ignores word 
processing, electing instead to write all his drafts by 
hand,	only	committing	the	very	final	copy	to	a	computer,	
to the geologist who forwards emails to himself so that 
the subject line can be changed, to the politician who 
has not digitised his audio diary but has it catalogued 
and cross-referenced online. Overall, the breadth of dis-
ciplines, backgrounds, ages and experiences of the in-
dividuals interviewed gave such contrasting and varied 
accounts	that	it	is	almost	impossible	to	generalise	find-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 298
ings. One thing is already very clear, however. The rise 
of Web 2.0 and document/data sharing and distribution 
over	 the	 internet	has	 lead	 to	 large	parts	of	 individuals’	
digital assets (photographs, blog entries, even email ar-
chives) being hosted by servers geographically remote 
and with no guarantee of permanence by the service pro-
vider – creating immense problems for future curation 
and access. The amount of poorly named and inconsist-
ently	stored	draft	documents	–	sometimes	with	a	‘final’	
version	being	lost	in	the	digital	ocean	of	one’s	‘C:’	Drive	
will be another challenge.
Two surveys were undertaken, both online, developed 
from the issues raised and responses given in the qualita-
tive phase of the research. One was to the general public, 
and the other to a sample of academics from both the 
humanities and sciences. We wished to explore differ-
ences in the online behaviours of different demographic 
and other groupings. It may be, for example, that scien-
tists behave quite differently, in terms of their creation 
and management of their digital assets from humanities 
scholars; or that novice computer users operate in a fun-
damentally different way from experts. Initial analysis 
suggests, for example, that back-up and retrieval behav-
iour is different between genders. The presentation will 
integrate	qualitative	and	quantitative	findings	from	rig-
orous and sophisticated statistical analyses facilitated by 
SPSS software (quantitative) and from HyperResearch, 
(qualitative). This will provide an initial though deep 
and comprehensive examination of digital information 
behaviour.
Conclusion
It need only be said in conclusion, as the presentation 
will	 present	 findings	 from	work	 presently	 in	 progress,	
that the way different people and groupings perceive, 
manipulate and store digital media has wide ranging im-
plications for creative or scholarly activity, for the design 
and functionality of future software applications, and for 
the capture and care of personal digital archives by re-
positories and their future access by humanities scholars 
and others. The presentation should be of wide appeal to 
a	‘digital	humanities’	audience.
References
Beagrie, N (2005), “Plenty of room at the bottom? Per-
sonal digital libraries and collections”, D-Lib Magazine, 
11(6) http://www.dlib.org/june05/beagrie.html
Bruce, H, Jones, W Dumais, S (2004) “Information be-
haviour that keeps found things found”  Information Re-
search, 10(1) paper 207 Available online: http://informa-
tionr.net/ir/10-1/paper207.html (accessed 12.10.08)
John, J L (2005) Because topics often fade: letters, es-
says, notes, digital manuscripts and other unpublished 
works pp399-422 in Narrow Roads of Gene Land Vol-
ume 3 Last Words, edited by M Ridley Oxford: Oxford 
University Press 
Jones, W (2007) Personal information management In B 
Cronin (Ed.), Annual review of information science and 
technology Medford, NJ: Information Today pp453-504
Kaye, J, with J Vetis, A Avery, A Dafoe S David, L Ona-
ga, I Rosero, T Pinch (2006) To have and to hold: ex-
ploring the personal archive CHI Proceedings, Personal 
Information Management, April 22-27 2006 Montreal, 
2006 
Malone, T W (1983) how do people organize their desks? 
Implications	for	the	design	of	office	information	systems	
ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems 1(1) 
pp99-112
Summers, A & John, J L (2001) The W D Hamilton Ar-
chive at the British Library Ethology, Ecology & Evolu-
tion 13, pp373-384 
Thomas, S, & Martin, J (2006) Using the papers of con-
temporary British politicians as a testbed for the preser-
vation of digital personal archives Journal of the Society 
of Archivists, 27(1) pp29-56 
Williams P, Dean K, Rowlands I, John JL (2008) Dig-
ital Lives: report of interviews with the creators of per-
sonal digital collections Ariadne 55 http://www.ariadne.
ac.uk/issue55/williams-et-al/ (posted 25.04.08; accessed 
13.11.08)
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  299
