Digital History Across the 
Curriculum
Amanda L. French 
New York University 
amanda.french@nyu.edu
Peter J. Wosh 
New York University 
pw1@nyu.edu
If	 digital	 humanities	 is	 an	 isolated	 ‘enclave’	 that	 re-mains largely isolated from humanities disciplines, as 
Martha Nell Smith averred at the 2008 Digital Humani-
ties and the Disciplines conference, perhaps one reason 
is that the residents of that enclave have not often tried 
to initiate broad curricular reform. Certainly, researchers 
who are part of the digital humanities community teach 
courses that use the writings of digital humanists, cours-
es that use the texts and images and audio and video dig-
itized with funds granted to digital humanists, courses 
that use the web sites and databases and software devel-
oped by digital humanists, courses that use the theories 
and methods and language of the digital humanities, but 
such courses seem to remain the specialized offerings of 
specialists.	Unlike	women’s	studies,	for	instance,	which	
at the very least increased the number of objects for hu-
manities inquiry by an order of magnitude, the research-
oriented	field	of	digital	humanities	has	not	changed	most	
humanities syllabi. 
This	paper	will	 tell	 the	 tale	of	one	graduate	program’s	
programmatic attempt to incorporate the intellectual and 
practical insights of the digital humanities throughout its 
curriculum. In 2008, the National Historical Publications 
and Records Commission awarded a grant to the Ar-
chives and Public History graduate program in the Histo-
ry department at New York University for the purpose of 
creating ‘a model curriculum that fully engages new me-
dia’	with	‘a	completely	integrated	and	coherent	approach	
to	digital	and	electronic	records	issues.’	(Wosh,	2007)	To	
create this model curriculum, the program hired a Digital 
Curriculum	Specialist	to	take	on	four	well-defined	tasks:	
first,	 to	 revise	 the	 syllabi	 for	 three	 key	 courses	 and	 to	
work closely with faculty and graduate students in those 
courses; second, to review the eight other syllabi for 
courses in the Archives and Public History program and 
suggest changes where needed; third, to arrange at least 
four digital history internships at cultural heritage insti-
tutions in the New York area to enable graduate students 
to	gain	significant	experience	working	on	digital	history	
projects; and fourth, to create an entirely new Advanced 
New Media course. 
The very existence of the Digital History Across the Cur-
riculum project at NYU might be considered evidence in 
support	of	the	claim	that	the	field	of	digital	humanities	
has ignored curricular reform, perhaps at its peril, per-
haps thus enclaving itself. As the grant proposal points 
out, the NYU Archives and Public History program is 
one of only a few archival studies programs based in a 
history department rather than in a library and/or infor-
mation science department, and this location in the hu-
manities	seems	to	have	hampered	the	program’s	ability	
to adapt organically: 
Joseph M. Turrini, an archival educator at Auburn Univer-
sity, correctly observed in a May 2007 AHA Perspectives 
article that most history-based archival education pro-
grams have failed to adjust to changing professional ex-
pectations, especially ‘the expansion of specialized archi-
val courses and the increased technological expectations 
of	 archivists.’	 In	 truth,	 public	historians,	 history	depart-
ments, and humanities-based archival training programs 
have largely lagged behind their information science col-
leagues. George Mason University offers an M.A. in Ap-
plied History with a new media and technology emphasis 
and	 has	 emerged	 as	 a	 leader	 in	 the	field,	 but	 few	other	
institutions have followed along. Most programs offer 
isolated	‘new	media’	courses	at	best.	Indeed,	recent	cur-
ricular	surveys	of	the	public	history	field	contain	virtually	
no discussion of technology or digital issues. This appears 
particularly puzzling since these studies also document 
the fact that employers expect program graduates to pos-
sess precisely the blend of technological, collaborative, 
and administrative skills that immersion in digital history 
might provide. (Wosh, 2007) 
For	‘applied’	humanities	fields	such	as	archival	studies,	
documentary editing, and public history, the need for 
digital curricular reform or reinvention is obvious, if not 
always easy, placed as they are within humanities de-
partments that rightly value critical inquiry for its own 
sake. It may be the case that digital humanities can only 
be	transformative	in	humanities	fields	with	just	such	an	
applied	emphasis;	even	our	project	confines	itself	to	re-
vising the curriculum of a single track within a large his-
tory department, rather than the broader curriculum of 
the history department itself.  
Yet one of the most promising and invigorating charac-
teristics	of	digital	humanities	as	a	field	is	that	it	combines	
an emphasis on applied professional skills with the same 
deep respect for intellect, ethics, and emotion that ani-
mates the traditional humanities. Will there ever be an 
initiative to revise the entire curriculum of a History de-
partment, an English department, a French department, 
a Philosophy department to incorporate the issues and 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  117
insights of the digital humanities? Does such an initia-
tive seem unlikely, unnecessary, unimaginable? If so, 
then perhaps the digital humanities is quite properly seg-
regated from humanities disciplines, and perhaps we can 
continue talking among ourselves. 
References
Smith, M. N. (2008). Enclaves: Perils and Possibilities. 
Unpublished conference paper. Digital Humanities and 
the Disciplines. Rutgers University, New Brunswick, 
NJ, October 2008.
Turrini, J. M. (2007). The Historical Profession and Ar-
chival Education. AHA Perspectives, 45(5).  http://www.
historians.org/perspectives/issues/2007/0705/0705vie2.
cfm (accessed 14 November 2008).  
Wosh, P. J. (2007). Digital History across the Curricu-
lum. Unpublished grant proposal. New York University: 
National Historical Publications and Records Commis-
sion.
