Dissent and Collaboration
Julia Flanders 
Brown University 
Julia_Flanders@brown.edu
Collaboration—literally a shared work—is typically understood to rest upon a form of agreement: about 
shared goals, common projects, standards of practice. As 
Aldo de Moor observes, modern-day collaborative prac-
tices tend to emerge from self-forming teams rather than 
being organized from above, and as a result this kind of 
agreement constitutes an essential foundation on which 
to proceed. He goes on to note that the crucial element 
to successful digital collaboration has a great deal to do 
with the way norms are developed and adjudicated:
The members of virtual professional communities, just 
like their peers in more traditional communities, are guid-
ed in their work by social norms. These norms guide both 
the	operational	activities	of	the	network	and	the	specifica-
tion	processes	in	which	the	network	is	defined.	However,	
as these networks are egalitarian by nature, the norms can-
not be imposed from above, but are to emerge from the 
community	as	a	whole.	Thus,	the	user-driven	specification	
process	needs	to	be	legitimate,	in	the	sense	that	specifica-
tion changes are not only meaningful but also acceptable 
to	all	community	members.	A	specification	change	is	ac-
ceptable if and only if the users for whom the particu-
lar change is relevant have been adequately involved in 
the	 specification	 process	 (Aldo	 de	Moor,	 “Empowering	
Communities: A Method for the Legitimate User-Driven 
Specification	 of	 Network	 Information	 Systems”,	 sum-
mary of PhD thesis, http://www.communitysense.nl/phd/
thes_summeng.html).
Relevant norms in the digital humanities context are 
quite wide-ranging: they include social norms, disciplin-
ary norms, and technical norms. But what I would like 
to	focus	on	for	purposes	of	this	paper	is	a	specific	kind	
of case in which disciplinary and technical norms over-
lap: the arena of standards for digital representation of 
research materials, and in particular the domain of schol-
arly markup languages. Text encoding as practiced in the 
digital humanities world sits at the juncture of humani-
ties scholarship—textually nuanced, exploratory, and 
introspective—and digital technology, with its empha-
sis on formalism and upward scalability. As a result its 
norms carry a double weight: they must achieve some 
kind of technically actionable uniformity, but they must 
also express useful scholarly concepts and differentia-
tions. 
Encoding standards such as the Text Encoding Initiative 
(TEI, http://www.tei-c.org/) are thus foundationally col-
laborative technologies: they presume the need and the 
desire to make individual insight widely communicable 
in a form that permits its extension, critique, and reuse. 
But the mechanisms for achieving this result in practical 
terms are complex and require thoughtful balancing of 
the requirements, respectively, of the individual and the 
community. As de Moor observes in the material quoted 
above, legitimate norms arise from a process of commu-
nity assent, but how is that assent best managed and ex-
pressed? And in the universe of humanities disciplines, 
where “the community” consists of multiple communi-
ties with shifting boundaries, how are norms constituted 
in a way that still permits intellectual growth? Even 
more importantly, given the critical role that dissent and 
debate play within the humanities research context, how 
can these be expressed? Can we imagine a role for dis-
sent within a functioning technical standard, without vi-
tiating its power to support collaboration?
Over the past 20 years, the research of the TEI and its 
user community has been centered on developing mech-
anisms that address the problem of norm-setting, in both 
the social and the technical sphere, in a way that I will 
argue	is	specifically	designed	to	accommodate	dissent	in	
a way that actively facilitates collaboration. This paper 
will	 critically	 examine	 the	 TEI’s	 framing	 motivations	
and	 the	 specific	mechanisms—intellectual, social, and 
above all technical—through which they have been re-
alized	 during	 the	 course	 of	 the	TEI’s	 development.	 In	
particular I will consider the practice of schema custom-
ization, through which the TEI manages both the rep-
resentation of the TEI language as a standard and the 
processes of dissent and expansion through which it is 
modified	by	its	users.	The	central	components	of	the	TEI	
customization process express, in effect, the relation-
ship between the individual and the community. The TEI 
source	or	ODD	file	represents	the	entire	landscape	of	the	
TEI in potential terms, and can be used to generate a 
maximally capacious schema that contains all possible 
TEI elements and structures. The ODD customization 
file	represents	the	world	of	an	individual	user	or	project:	
the set of choices and limitations or extensions through 
which the individual adapts the TEI schema to local us-
age.	From	these	two	files,	with	appropriate	processing,	
one can generate a schema that expresses the TEI land-
scape as viewed through the lens of the individual ap-
plication.	The	ODD	customization	file,	 then,	expresses	
the distance between the individual and the community: 
both the agreement the community has established con-
cerning meaning, and also (perhaps more importantly) 
the degree by which the individual dissents from the 
standard, while still acknowledging its centrality for the 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  109
community as a whole. 
Dissent is nothing new in the humanities; what is distinc-
tive about this mechanism is that it formalizes dissent 
and allows its vector to be traversed in two directions. 
The	 same	 path	 that	 leads	 away	 from	 the	 unmodified	
TEI standard towards the individual application (from 
generality	 to	 specificity)	 can	 also	 be	 followed	 back	 to	
the center again. This traversal can be effected both by 
human beings and by computer processes. Informa-
tion concerning what has been changed and why can be 
expressed in human-readable form and may serve as a 
valuable support in understanding the methodological 
choices	that	underlie	a	project’s	encoding	practice.	Simi-
larly,	the	ODD	customization	file	can	serve	as	the	basis	
for automated analysis that could, for example, identify 
all projects from a large set that use the same set of TEI 
modules or remove the same set of elements; generate a 
list representing the greatest common set of values for a 
given attribute across a group of projects and also iden-
tify the values that are unique to each project; identify 
the range of new elements created by each project and 
their TEI equivalents. Taken as a whole, the customiz-
able approach taken by the TEI permits the standard to 
function (both socially and technically) as an agreement 
at many levels—on the intention to treat data as a shar-
able and preservable resource, on the value of shared 
data standards, on the descriptive utility of this particu-
lar approach to modelling humanities texts, and on the 
impossibility of creating a single descriptive model that 
will satisfy all needs. 
In an important sense, this customization mechanism en-
capsulates the central challenge of collaborative work, 
and even of language itself: that of how to balance the 
urge toward individual expressiveness with the man-
dates of public comprehensibility, the desire for individ-
ual freedom of agency against the need for group action. 
This	paper	will	explore	several	specific	examples	drawn	
from real TEI projects to demonstrate the different kinds 
of managed dissent that can be expressed using the cus-
tomization mechanism, including the following:
•	 the use of shared generic structures (<div>, <seg>, 
etc.) coupled with customized constraint of attribute 
values to express variations on common structures
•	 the use of “syntactic sugar”: the creation of project-
specific	 elements	 that	 are	 explicitly	 equivalent	 to	
standard TEI elements
•	 the use of the TEI class system to express how a 
project-specific	vocabulary	fits	into	the	TEI’s	struc-
tural model
The important question emerging from these issues is 
what this kind of discursive agreement and dissent actu-
ally achieves in the collaborative domain. Several points 
should be noted and will be explored in more detail in the 
finished	paper.	First,	agreement	of	course	permits	com-
munication, but properly formalized dissent is an equally 
important dimension of communication. Language (in-
cluding formal encoding language) expresses a view 
of the world, and it is essential to be able to disagree 
about that view, or to express a different view. But that 
disagreement must be explicit rather than covert: other-
wise tag abuse is the result. A second, complementary 
question is how we can distinguish between meaningful 
dissent (essential points of disciplinary difference) and 
meaningless dissent (based on laziness or other social 
failures). Are the mechanisms for making this distinc-
tion solely social and human, or are there automatable 
mechanisms conceivable as well? Finally, what kinds 
of collaboration are possible where formalized dissent 
and disagreement, rather than complete agreement, are 
the result of using a standard? I will argue that for the 
digital humanities community, effective management 
of disagreement—rather than simply the production of 
agreement—is the most important role a standard like 
the TEI can play.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 110
