Gen Y Teaching Gen Y 
Meghan Rosatelli
Virginia Commonwealth University  
rosatellime@vcu.edu	
 
In the August issue of Adbusters Magazine, Doug-las	 Haddow	 claims	 that	 the	 new,	 twenty-first	 cen-
tury counterculture is the unfortunate hipster. Haddow 
claims, in no uncertain terms, that Gen Y is so un-
original, narcissistic, and media obsessed, that we fail 
to even create a suitable counterculture. We are, in ef-
fect, doomed to the digital world that spawned us and 
doomed	to	the	insignificance	of	a	“metrical	mass”	where	
our	 unconscious	 is	 infinitely	 plastic	 and	 subject	 to	 the	
environmental forces that surround us (Borch-Jacobsen, 
1982). The Adbusters article struck a chord, not because 
my students brought me both digital and hard copies of 
the	magazine	during	the	first	week	of	class,	but	because	
I realized that Haddow was not just talking about my 
students—he was talking about me. My course, “English 
391: Reading Counterculture: 1950-present”1 is based 
on the interdisciplinary MATX PhD program and has 
a diverse student body ranging from the School of the 
Arts to English. All of the students are juniors or seniors, 
making them between twenty and twenty-three years of 
age. I am twenty-six. We are Gen Y, and we are getting 
slammed—our	meticulously	mismatched	outfits	and	all.	
This research attempts to answer questions that arose, 
and continue to arise, as I teach media and culture litera-
ture courses. How do I teach my own generation media 
and culture? How do I utilize technology in the class-
room that is meaningful? And, how do I keep their atten-
tion— and my attention for three hours each week, and 
up to six more with homework and reading assignments? 
The	first	question	skews	 the	subsequent	questions	dra-
matically. Appealing to Gen Y and bringing relevant 
technology into the arts and humanities is, fortunately, 
a	well-researched	problem.	David	Buckingham’s	Media 
Education: Literacy, Learning, and Contemporary Cul-
ture	 (2003)	 identifies	and	explains	 strategies	 for	 incor-
porating and teaching media in the classroom in order 
to promote new sites of learning—a democratic educa-
tional approach made popular in the seventies and con-
tinued	 today.	 Joe	 Lockard	 and	Mark	 Pengrum’s	 (Ed.)	
Brave New Classrooms: Democratic Education and the 
Internet (2007), delve into tactics concerning dynamic 
teaching on the web. The editors also incorporate the 
pros and cons of digital education—namely the lack of 
corporeal awareness that is often subscribed to web us-
ers.2 Tara McPherson, another editor of an inspiring col-
lection of articles, culls a wide variety of educational/
generational topics, such as current notions of temporali-
ty and the increasingly blurry divide between citizenship 
and consumption in Digital Youth, Innovation, and the 
Unexpected (2007). These publications, and the count-
less others not listed here, show the growing interest and 
relevant scholarship in the digital humanities and Gen Y. 
They are, for the most part, positive and forward think-
ing books and articles that attempt to utilize the unique 
skill sets of their students while transforming everyday 
technology into teaching tools. Yet, none of them spe-
cifically	address	the	issue	of	the	first	digital	generation	
becoming university instructors and professors. The top-
down, rush to know the latest-digital-tools-in-order-to-
appeal-to-a-new type-of-student is slowly being pushed 
aside as a new generation of instructors appear on the 
scene. 
As many of the aforementioned scholars note, I realized 
that incorporating technology into the humanities class-
room was a tricky task, as was sharing my generational 
status with my students. My two biggest challenges came 
with utilizing technology in a way that appealed to my 
students (knowing the technology that was being “used” 
on me as a student), and teaching in a way that recog-
nized, instead of ignored, our Gen Y status.3 In short, 
the students and I had to be in it together—all in—or 
the entire course would collapse. And, I had to establish 
this “all in” concept early. After airing our mutual hatred 
of discussion boards, the tedium of being forced to re-
spond to posts, and a host of other unfortunately typical 
uses of technology in the classroom, the students began 
keeping personal blogs. They had to post at least once a 
week (Saturday at midnight) and, initially, they had to 
utilize just about everything the blog had to offer in order 
to build a comfort level with embedding video, creating 
links, and working in a hypertextual fashion. 
A common misconception permeates many “top down” 
views of Gen Y: we are all technically savvy. I can say 
with certainty, this is not true. The simpler the technol-
ogy, the better, the more aesthetically pleasing the tech-
nology, the better, the more personal the technology, the 
better. I can also say that nothing irritates students more 
than to feel as though they are the guinea pigs in a tech-
nology experiment where the instructor is conveniently 
separate—viewing from above. So, I blogged, I linked, 
I embedded, and I read each link, watched each video, 
and listened to each song on their twenty-four blogs. The 
technology extended our conference style class discus-
sions throughout the week, but the technology was not 
enough—and it never is. We critically assessed our Gen 
Y status as a perspective and a coda to the vibrant coun-
terculture movements that preceded us. Instead of being 
bogged down by an often pejorative and inaccurate label, 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  237
we interrogated our actions, views, and aesthetic choic-
es. The result was a class that used simple and accessible 
technology in moderation, utilized various forms of me-
dia in the classroom to spur discussion (video, sound, 
etc.) and accepted, instead of ignored, our unique simi-
larities as the “plugged in” generation. (I think, secretly, 
we each sought to prove Douglas Haddow wrong.) 
The purpose of this research, as noted above, is to in-
vestigate	the	benefits	and	restrictions	that	generation	on	
generation teaching has on both classroom dynamic and 
the uses of technology in the classroom. I believe that a 
shared	generational	 status,	 although	a	fleeting	moment	
in time, can provide new and interesting perspectives on 
teaching pedagogy in the humanities. 
Works Cited 
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel (1982). The Freudian Subject. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Buckingham, David (2003). Media Education: Literacy, 
Learning, and Contemporary Culture. Cambridge: Pol-
ity Press. 
Lockhard, Joe and Mark Pengrum, Ed. (2007). Brave 
New Classrooms: Democratic Education and the Inter-
net. New York: Peter Lang Publishing. 
Hayles, N. Katherine (2005). My Mother was a Com-
puter. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
McPherson, Tara, Ed. (2007). Digital Youth: Innovation 
and the Unexpected. Cambridge:  MIT Press. 
White, Michele (2006). The Body and the Screen: Theo-
ries of Internet Spectatorship. Cambridge, MIT Press. 
Notes
1This course has a companion course “Reading Twenti-
eth Century Popular Culture” that I also teach. 
2Michele White and N. Katherine Hayles discuss these 
themes in their books The Body and the Screen and My 
Mother was a Computer, respectively. 
3Unlike technical course in digital design or generally 
straightforward courses in composition and rhetoric, 
counterculture required a certain street credibility (for 
lack of a better word). 
