Gobineau and Tocqueville: The 
Curious Case of the Medical 
Metaphor in Corpus Stylistics
 
Joel	Goldfield 
Fairfield	University 
jgoldfield@mail.fairfield.edu
Corpus stylistics and statistical analysis of keywords can have a voice in a growing debate about the liter-
ary effect of metaphor between two nineteenth-century 
authors	who	also	served	as	French	government	officials:	
Arthur de Gobineau (1816-1882) and Alexis de Toc-
queville (1805-1859).  In his prize-winning biography 
on Tocqueville, Hugh Brogan recently highlighted an 
aggressive response made 150 years before by the es-
teemed literary statesman to his former chief of staff. 
Tocqueville, Brogan argues, disagreed “...entirely with 
Gobineau’s	 immoral	 ideas	 about	 human	 decadence”	
(592) and miscegeny, particularly as expressed in the lat-
ter’s L’Essai sur l’inégalité des races humaines, whose 
first	two	volumes	Tocqueville	had	read.		In	his	defense,	
Gobineau,	at	 that	point	a	diplomat	 in	France’s	Foreign	
Service, replied that, “he was no more immoral than a 
doctor who tells his patient that his disease is mortal” 
(592).  Brogan then cites, in his own translation, a key 
paragraph from the published correspondence of July 30, 
1856, from Tocqueville to Gobineau: 
I reply that if the act is not immoral in itself, it can only 
produce immoral or pernicious consequences.  If my doc-
tor came to me one morning to say, ‘My dear sir, I have 
the honour to announce that you have a mortal illness, and 
as it affects your very constitution, I have the advantage 
of being able to add that there is absolutely no chance of 
saving	you	in	any	way,’	I	would	first	be	tempted	to	knock	
the fellow down. (592) 
To	Tocqueville’s	 follow-up	 thought	 that	he	would	 then	
hide	under	the	blanket	or	perhaps,	like	Boccaccio’s	char-
acters during the plague in Florence, indulge his whims 
or perhaps prepare himself for the afterlife before the in-
evitable occurred, Brogan adds a provocative footnote: 
“It might be interesting to know exactly when AT [Alex-
is	 de	Tocqueville]	 read	Gobineau’s	 latest	 volumes.	 	 In	
the Foreword to the Ancien Régime he compares himself 
to a physician (OC II i 73)” (592). 
With	so	much	of	Tocqueville’s	and	Gobineau’s	literary	
and historical work online in the ARTFL database, cor-
pus stylistics and statistical analysis may have something 
to	offer	our	research	on	the	vocabulary	of	Tocqueville’s	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 128
ness the patient had succumbed, but how he could have 
avoided dying. I have done as those doctors who, for 
each exhausted organ, try to surprise the laws of life. My 
goal has been to paint a picture that would be exact and 
that at the same time could be instructive” (my transla-
tion).
(“J’avoue donc qu’en étudiant notre ancienne société 
dans chacune de ses parties, je n’ai jamais perdu en-
tièrement de vue la nouvelle. Je n’ai pas seulement voulu 
voir à quel mal le malade avait succombé, mais comment 
il aurait pu ne pas mourir. J’ai fait comme ces médecins 
qui, dans chaque organe éteint, essayent de surprendre 
les lois de la vie. Mon but a été de faire un tableau qui 
fût strictement exact, et qui, en même temps, pût être in-
structif.”)
One	might	wonder	whether	Tocqueville’s	delicate	health	
and	 Gobineau’s	 repugnant	 preference	 for	 partitioned	
racial	 types	 as	 a	way	 to	 stabilize	mankind’s	 existence	
might have led to added references to doctors and re-
lated terms. Judging by the data in the ARTFL FRAN-
TEXT database, the entire exchange described above is, 
on the contrary, quite uncommon for these two authors 
as	 individuals.	Tocqueville’s	use	of	 the	combination	or	
cluster médecin(s)- vie(s)–organe(s) in the foreword 
of	L’Ancien	 régime	 is	one	of	only	 seven	 such	clusters	
within the same sentence over the entire FRANTEXT 
database,	 from	 the	 early	 1600’s	 through	 1992	 in	 the	
2,540 documents searched. And two of these seven were 
purely medically oriented.
The z-scores in Figure 1 suggest at least two somewhat 
surprising interpretations. First, Tocqueville, rather than 
Gobineau, seems to have the more medically oriented 
attitude toward politics and civilization. The z-score of 
+4.23	 in	 Tocqueville’s	 correspondence	 is	 statistically	
significant	in	its	positive	rate	whereas	Gobineau’s	rate	of	
-2.25	is	an	inverse	correlate,	significantly	negative.	Sec-
ond,	the	use	of	the	lemma	médecin	in	Tocqueville’s	An-
cien régime, during whose writing he became increas-
ingly	ill	with	tuberculosis,	is	also	negatively	significant.	
This fact heightens the value of the cluster doctor(s)- 
life/lives-organ(s) (médecin(s)- vie(s)–organe(s)) de-
scribed above. Returning to the original observation by 
Hugh Brogan, one might suppose that he and perhaps 
others who are scholars or otherwise frequent readers 
of	 Tocqueville’s	 work	 are	 likely	 to	 be	 even	more	 im-
pressed by the physician/doctor metaphor. While the use 
of	médecin(s)	in	L’Ancien	régime	does	not	attract	atten-
tion for repetition compared to the norm of the quarter 
century, it certainly does for cognitive and statistical 
reasons	 in	Tocqueville’s	and	Gobineau’s	oeuvres	 .	The	
bas-relief	 of	 the	word’s	 rarity	 in	 this	 work	moves	 the	
striking reply of July 1856, compared to the wording in 
his foreword to L’Ancien régime et la révolution.  The 
first	two	volumes	of	Gobineau’s	Essai had been already 
been	 published	 in	 the	 summer	 of	 1853.	 	The	first	 two	
occurrences of médecin(s),	both	in	the	first	two	volumes	
released, and the fourth, in the last two volumes (1855) 
to	which	Brogan	refers	as	“Gobineau’s	latest	volumes,”	
are simply part of a list of professions.  The third, how-
ever, occurs in a discussion of Plato.  Gobineau ex-
plains that either because of status attributable to his 
birth	 or	 because	 of	 circumstances,	 Plato	 finds	 himself	
in	charge.		Unfortunately,	horrified	by	Athen’s	problems	
and hesitant to undertake any mission that might worsen 
them, Plato remains powerless to act.  “Such people,” 
Gobineau opines, “are doctors, not surgeons and, like 
Epaminondas and Philopoemen, they cover themselves 
in	glory	without	fixing	anything”	(my	translation).		And	
so it would seem that doctors may be good only for di-
agnosing problems, not repairing the damage.  Indeed, 
Gobineau had written to Tocqueville on March 20, 1856, 
“I am no more an assassin than the doctor who says that 
the end is near.  I’m wrong or I’m right.”  All written 
in relatively close chronological succession, Gobineau’s 
thoughts seem to imply that he is like Plato and like a 
doctor, intelligent enough to see the errors of mankind’s 
ways, able to speak up to diagnose the ills, but powerless 
to solve any of them.  How inconvenient!  Explaining 
away any curative or corrective abilities that doctors may 
have is a false premise, perhaps appealing to a minority 
of popular complaints, and seems to serve as justifica-
tion for the supposedly perceptive Gobineau to throw his 
hands in the air.  Tocqueville, however, remains hope-
ful, despite the ill health that has been plaguing him for 
years:  “I add that physicians, like the philosophes, are 
often wrong in their predictions, and I have seen more 
than one man condemned by them carrying himself quite 
well later while resenting the doctor who had needlessly 
frightened and discouraged him.” 
Research on the delivery patterns of letters between 
Gobineau and Tocqueville indicates the probability that 
enough	time	existed	for	Gobineau’s	letter	of	March	20,	
1856, sent by diplomatic post from Teheran, to reach 
Tocqueville	in	Paris	before	the	final	weeks	in	May	and	
the	first	 two	weeks	 in	early	June	when	he	wrote	or	re-
vised,	 respectively,	 the	 foreword	 to	 L’Ancien	 régime	
(see	Gannett,	p.	144).		Tocqueville’s	work	was	not	pub-
lished until June 16, 1856 (see http://classiques.uqac.ca/
classiques/De_tocqueville_alexis/ancien_regime/An-
cien_regime.pdf).
“I therefore admit that in studying our former society in 
each of its parts, I have never entirely lost the new one 
from sight. I have not only wanted to see to what ill-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  129
word and its word cluster to the forefront, particularly in 
a foreword. Coupled with time and opportunity, it indeed 
seems likely that Tocqueville had a rebuttal to Gobineau 
on his mind as he penned the avant-propos shortly be-
fore	his	own	father’s	death.	It	is	no	coincidence	that	in	
the next sentence after the medical metaphor, he writes 
of fathers, male virtues (“vertus mâles”), and faith in a 
cause as well as in ourselves, “la foi en nous-mêmes et 
dans une cause.”
Figure 1. Norms for the lemma médicin(s) (“doctor/s”) in 
the ARTFL database
References 
ARTFL.  American and French Research on the Treasury 
of the French Language.  U. of Chicago. 
Brogan, Hugh (2006)  Alexis de Tocqueville:  A Life. 
New Haven:  Yale. 
Gannett, Robert T., Jr. (2003)  Tocqueville Unveiled. 
Chicago & London:  University of Chicago. 
Gobineau, Arthur de (1853) Essai sur l’inégalité des 
races humaines, vols. 1 & 2.  Paris:  Pierre Belfond. 
ARTFL database. 
---- (1855) Essai sur l’inégalité des races humaines, 
vols. 3 & 4.  Paris:  Pierre Belfond.  ARTFL database. 
Tocqueville, Alexis de (1959)  Oeuvres complètes. Tome 
II.  L’Ancien régime et la révolution.  Originally pub-
lished in 1856.  Also see: see http://classiques.uqac.ca/
classiques/De_tocqueville_alexis/ancien_regime/An-
cien_regime.pdf.
--- Oeuvres complètes.  Tome IX.  Correspondance 
d’Alexis de Tocqueville et d’Arthur de Gobineau. In-
troduction by J.-J. Chevallier. Edited and annotated by 
Maurice Degros.  Paris: Gallimard.  Correspondence 
dates from 1843-1859. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 130
