“Going to the Show”: Spatial 
and Temporal History of 
Moviegoing in North Carolina
Natasha Smith 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Libaries 
nsmith@email.unc.edu
Elise Moore 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill  
elimoore@email.unc.edu
Kevin Eckhardt
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
kevineck@email.unc.edu
Robert C. Allen 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
rallen@email.unc.edu
A scholarly digital publication “Going to the Show” grew	out	of	Prof.	Robert	C.	Allen’s	use	of	UNC	Li-
brary archival materials in teaching and writing about the 
history	of	film	exhibition	and	moviegoing.		It	is	a	result	
of close collaboration between Prof. Allen, James Logan 
Godfrey Distinguished Professor of American Studies, 
History, and Communication Studies at the University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Documenting the 
American South (DocSouth)—a digital library labora-
tory that creates, develops, and maintains online digital 
collections regarding the history of the American South 
drawn primarily from the outstanding archival holdings 
of the UNC library. “Going to the Show” documents and 
illuminates the experience of movies and moviegoing 
in North Carolina between the introduction of projected 
motion	pictures	(1896)	and	the	end	of	the	silent	film	era	
(1930).  It is a historiographic experiment on several 
levels, in which collaborators endeavor to use digital 
technologies in a variety of innovative ways to collect, 
organize, and display data and materials that illuminate 
the historical experience of cinema.      
As theatrical moviegoing becomes a thing more remem-
bered than experienced, Allen argues that one of the 
most striking features of the experience of cinema for a 
hundred years was its sociality.   For a century follow-
ing	the	demonstration	of		Edison’s	Vitascope	projector	at	
Koster	and	Bial’s	Music	Hall	in	New	York	on	April	23,	
1896, the experience of cinema in America and, indeed, 
around the world, involved a distinctive (though highly 
variable) social practice: groups of people converging 
upon particular places to experience together something 
understood to be cinema. The project team selected and 
published online numerous city directories, local news-
papers ads and clippings, several hundred picture post-
cards and photographs that assisted with telling the story 
in a fuller or more holistic manner (see Figure 1.) 
Figure 1. Metadata associated with Royal Theater in 
Wilmington, NC. Additional resources – postcards, 
newspaper ads and clippings, city directories.
However, recent work in cultural geography has helped 
us to look at the history of cinema as the history of the 
experience of cinema and to look at cinema as a set of 
practices occurring in space (see Doreen Massey). Like 
space, the experience of cinema is relational, heteroge-
neous, and open-ended.  In that, collaborators turned to 
another valuable resource of information–Sanborn Fire 
Insurance Maps.  Between 1867 and 1977 the Sanborn 
Map Company of Pelham, New York, produced large-
scale (usually 50 feet to the inch) color maps of commer-
cial and industrial districts of some 12,000 towns and cit-
ies	in	North	America	to	assist	fire	insurance	companies	
in setting rates and terms.  Each set of maps represented 
each built structure in those districts, its use, dimensions, 
height, building material, and other relevant features 
(fire	alarms,	water	mains	and	hydrants,	for	example).	
Looking through thousands of map pages over the years, 
thinking about how they represent the experience of 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 256
moviegoing and about how the maps might be represent-
ed in “Going to the Show,” Allen started rethinking not 
only the sociality but also the spatiality of the experience 
of cinema more generally.  For most white people living 
in towns or cities of any size in N.C. and those living 
in the countryside around these towns and cities in the 
first	three	decades	of	cinema	history,	going	to	the	movies	
was a part of the experience of the spaces of downtown 
social, cultural, commercial and consumer life.  Under-
standing what went on inside the theater requires under-
standing what went outside.   
What the Sanborn maps enable us to see—in ways that 
other representations of the social experience of movie-
going do not—is that the space of the experience of cin-
ema in towns and cities across North Carolina, and pos-
sibly in many other places as well, was not bounded by 
the places in which movies were shown.  The maps show 
clearly that the emergence of movie culture in North 
Carolina is inextricably linked to the rise and develop-
ment of urban central business districts (see Figure 2.)
We will represent the Sanborn maps in “Going to the 
Show” in a way that they were never intended to be: with 
individual map pages digitally stitched together so that 
they	form	a	composite	overview	of	a	town’s	central	busi-
ness district.  In 45 communities, moviegoing is mapped 
onto Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps (1896-1922), show-
ing how moviegoing became an important part of the ex-
perience of everyday life in the growing cities and towns 
of early 20th century North Carolina.  These map pages 
have been digitally “stitched” together and geo-refer-
enced to display the entire “downtown” of representa-
tive communities across the state.  The evolution of suc-
cessive map sets produced from 1896 to 1922 illustrates 
how these towns and cities grew and changed at a time 
of rapid urbanization and industrialization.  Displaying 
the maps in Google Earth vividly illustrates a century of 
continuity and change.  
The decision process for which tools to use in order to 
bring this picture to life, has been a balance between 
experimental technology and usability.  “Going to the 
Show” is using kml layers upon Google Maps and 
Google Earth to place the Sanborn maps within context. 
Google’s	open-source	map	API	is	used	for	zooming	and	
hotspot addition. There is also a MySQL (soon to be 
PostGRES) database to manage the metadata about the 
contextual items which have been collected in order to 
paint the entire picture of moviegoing. As a result, users 
can search for movie exhibition sites, locations, man-
agers,	and	racial	policy	across	the	first	thirty-five	years	
of moviegoing in more than 200 N.C. communities. 
Adobe PhotoShop is used for stitching together digital 
Sanborn Map images and basic manipulation of docu-
mentary content images, as necessary (sharpening, resiz-
ing, and more). The software Global Mapper is used for 
geo-referencing Sanborn maps. It converts, edits, prints, 
tracks GPS, and allows utilization of GIS functionality 
in datasets.   
Figure 2. Wilmington, N.C., 1915. Hotspot “TICKET” displays Royal Theater with relevant available information.   
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  257
References
Richard Maltby, Melvyn Stokes, and Robert C. Allen, 
eds., Going to the Movies: Hollywood and the Social 
Experience of Cinema (Exeter: Univ. of Exeter Press, 
2007) 
Doreen Massey, For Space (London: Sage, 2005) 
Anne Kelly Knowles, Placing History: How Maps, 
Spatial Data, and GIS Are Changing Historical 
Scholarship (California: ESRI Press, 2008) 
Suzy Beemer, Richard Marciano, Todd Presner, Seeing 
Urban Spaces Anew at the University of California 
(CTWatch Quarterly, May 2007, vol. 3, number 2, http://
www.ctwatch.org/quarterly/articles/2007/05/seeing-ur-
ban-spaces-anew/1/) 
 
 
