Googling Google Books: 
Integrated use of Fragmentary 
Information Display in Google 
Book Preview of Electronic 
Books
Kirsten C. Uszkalo 
Simon Fraser University 
kcu2@sfu.ca
Teresa Dobson 
University of British Columbia 
teresa.dobson@ubc.ca 
Stan Ruecker 
University of Alberta 
sruecker@ualberta.ca
Introduction
In previous articles and panels, the authors of this paper 
have argued that human/textual interaction is an essen-
tial missing aspect of the electronic book reading experi-
ence.	In	order	to	fulfill	the	needs	of	the	bibliophile,	for	
whom the touch, feel, portability, and engagement with 
the paper book is part of the pleasure of reading, the elec-
tronic book needs to be a tactile, multiplatform device 
(Ruecker & Uszkalo 2007, 2008). Our investigation led 
us to look at the user interface of current single platform 
electronic reading technologies such Sony PRS 505 
and Kindle and the more multifaceted iLiad v2 reader/ 
writer. We argued that e-paper makes these devices more 
user-friendly and offers the potential for a lower envi-
ronmental footprint then paper books (de Grancy 2008), 
but noted that their lack of positive form, function, and 
feel when coupled with their proprietary software and 
the cost of e-books remained major stumbling blocks to 
the overall adoption of electronic reading devices (Sot-
tong 2008, Milliot 2008a, 2008b). We concluded that the 
numerous multifunction platforms used for electronic 
reading, such as computer screens, phones, and iPods 
will keep a single-function electronic book reader as a 
specialty item. 
In this phase, we turn our attention to a fuller consider-
ation of one of those platforms: Google Books. Since 
Google Books has digitized and displays copyright ma-
terial, it provides the user with incomplete views of the 
text. Our research question asks how does the underlying 
structure	of	Google	Books’	display	of	snippets,	incom-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 288
plete chapters, and limited views of text affect how the 
digitally	efficacious	student	navigates	through	these	doc-
uments and how does it affect her reading and research 
experience, comprehension, and synthesis of material?
The	 academic	 library’s	widespread	 adoption	 of	 digital	
resources has created the need to reconsider how stu-
dents are conducting research. Undertaking university-
level research assignments has always been a frustrating 
skill to acquire for new students. Current critical con-
sensus	suggests	the	necessity	of	teaching	specific	inde-
pendent research strategies to university students to help 
them navigate and synthesize the massive amount of re-
sources available to them (Holz et al., 2008, Femster & 
Gray	2008,	Polack-Wahl	&	Anewalt	2006).	In	ebrary’s	
Global Student E-book Survey, released June 2008, stu-
dents ranked e-books equivalent with their print coun-
terparts as “trustworthy” and acknowledged their use in 
research assignments.  Research using electronic docu-
ments provides the opportunity to negotiate broad spans 
of text; Lui (2005) argues that “screen-based reading 
behavior is characterized by more time spent on brows-
ing and scanning, keyword spotting, one-time reading, 
non-linear reading, and reading more selectively, while 
less time is spent on in-depth reading, and concentrated 
reading.” In terms of conducting academic research, 
students can sift through information and collect numer-
ous snippets of information. Many students are already 
used to engaging with multiple internet applications 
like audio and video streams, instant messaging, and 
file	sharing	to	access	information	inside	and	outside	the	
educational setting (McGreal & Elliot 2004). Likewise, 
they use functions like Twitter, texting, FaceBook, RSS 
feeds,	keyword	searches	and	indices	to	find	and	absorb	
small fragments of information in meaningful ways. The 
challenge emerges in synthesizing these snippets of in-
formation outside of their original context.  However 
skilled the student might be in amassing information, the 
information they gather using Google Books often lacks 
context within the larger work.  The student must synthe-
size the snippets into their own linear arguments without 
having read or followed the complete arguments in the 
texts they are mining for quotes. Eshet-Alakali argues 
that to create “original academic work with the aid of 
digital techniques for text reproduction, requires schol-
ars to master a special type of literacy” (98).  They call 
this reproduction literacy, which is “the ability to create 
a meaningful, authentic, and creative work or interpreta-
tion, by integrating existing independent pieces of infor-
mation,” which is a learned skill (98).  
Although researchers have yet to see empirical evidence 
that students can translate reproduction literacy into suc-
cessful academic argumentation, the students perceive 
they can. As such, the movement towards using Google 
Books’	limited	previews	to	quickly	search	specific	ideas	
across texts not otherwise on hand appears to be a logical 
extension	of	existing	information	finding	practices,	act-
ing as a center point between authoritative text and quick 
nonlinear thinking and research strategies. Students are 
trained to see books as an authoritative source, and they 
translate the affordance of the printed book in terms of 
St.	Amant’s	 relationships	or	properties	of	 relationships	
and perceived properties into their interaction with 
Google Books as part of a continued, trusted relationship 
(1998).	In	terms	of	internet	efficacy	(Eastin	&	LaRose,	
2000), and the positive affordances of online learning 
(Anderson 2004), the dynamic and fragmentary interac-
tion	provided	by	Google	Books’	platform	seems	familiar	
and would not be seen as detrimental to this group of 
users. However, users may consider just how much their 
textual interaction is being controlled and delineated by 
Google Books and how those limitations affect knowl-
edge gathering and comprehension.  
The Canadian Association of Research Libraries Copy-
right Committee argued in their recent survey, “Task 
Group on E-Books” that there “is a danger that research 
libraries are adding e-books to their collections using 
agreements	 that	 significantly	 reduce	 users’	 rights”	 in-
cluding textual access and reproduction. Issues of copy-
right are what create different experiences for readers – 
providing whole texts or stripping access down to sound 
bites. According to Google Book Search help, for books 
which are under copyright, and are not part of their part-
ner programs, users are only able to see “basic informa-
tion about the book, similar to a card catalog, and, in 
some cases, a few “snippets” of “sentences of [their] 
search terms in context.” These keyword results allow 
students to feel critical engagement with texts, providing 
a	singular	index	across	an	otherwise	flat	and	non-trans-
ferable platform. In this way information is displayed in 
vastly different amounts, dependant on copyright. On 
some occasions lines of text appear as little scraps of 
digital paper, or “snippets”; on other occasions, previews 
allow readers to view a certain number of pages, or read 
a random sequence of pages at a time, often missing a 
few pages in between. 
Google Books essentially operates under a shroud of se-
crecy, despite partnerships with numerous universities 
such Cornell and Columbia, providing no practical in-
formation about its underlying code.  Despite this, there 
a few things we can assume about its digital creation 
process based on common digitization techniques. It is 
likely that, as part of the Google Books digitization pro-
cess, two things are created: the scanned image, which 
is	displayed	to	the	user,	and	an	XML-encoded	text	file	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  289
generated by an OCR (Optical Code Recognition) ap-
plication,	which	is	not	seen.	This	XML-encoded	text	file	
contains all of the words in the document, but also stores 
positional information for each word (where each word 
appears physically on the page, including its height and 
width).  When users search in Google Books, they are 
not searching the scanned image, but rather, are search-
ing	the	XML-encoded	text	file.	Google	Books	then	com-
bines the scanned image with the positional information 
in	 the	XML-encoded	 text	file,	and	 fakes	 the	 text	high-
lighting by drawing a transparent yellow box over the 
word in the scanned image. 
Textual engagement in Google Books is therefore radi-
cally altered when the display truncates and limits the 
amount of text a reader can access. The text is at the 
same	 time	both	dynamic	and	static,	neither	 simply	file	
nor page, and the reader is neither simply a researcher 
nor a casual reader. Text display and reader interaction 
remain	in	flux,	dependent	on	how	the	text	is	being	dis-
played and how much the reader can view and search. 
The	reader	might	find	her	experience	as	constructed	in	
small glimpses, large text chunks, or whole chapters, 
but cannot know how the text will be displayed until she 
loads it. Likewise, she cannot know when a blank page 
will remove part of the text and if subsequent pages will 
appear. However, the successful keyword hit across an 
otherwise blanked out book is seen to represent a suc-
cessful, albeit fragmentary and miniaturized, search. 
Conclusions 
Digitally savvy university students have begun to use 
Google Books as a research tool. Although this plat-
form provides fragmentary keyword searches and lim-
ited previews of text blocks, which radically alter the 
user’s	 reading	experience,	anecdotal	evidence	suggests	
students	who	are	sufficiently	familiar	with	short	text	dis-
play communication feel they get enough information 
from the limited preview to use these texts as sources 
for	 research.	Although	 Google	 Books’	 textual	 display	
has the potential to radically unsettle the reading experi-
ence	it	appears	as	sufficient	for	entry-level	engagement	
with students who still see these displays as offering the 
authority of the book and the ease of use of the electronic 
text. More investigation of the way in which the Google 
Books’	 display	 facilitates	 research	 interactions	 among	
university students is needed.
References
Anderson, Terry. “Toward a Theory of Online Learning” 
Theory and Practice of Online Learning. Athabasca: 
Athabasca UP. 2004, 33-60.
Benson, Denzel E., Wava Haney, Tracy E Ore, Caroline 
H	Persell,	Aileen	Schulte,	James	Steele,	Idee	Winfield.	
“Digital Technologies and the Scholarship of Teaching 
and Learning in Sociology.” Teaching Sociology. 30 
(2002). 140-157.
de Grancy, Gerald Senarclens.  Diss. “Technical, Eco-
logical and Economic Aspects of Electrophoretic Dis-
play Applications” Institute for Information Systems and 
Computer Media (IICM) Graz University of Technology 
A-8010 Graz, Austria, Europe, March 13, 2008.
Eastin,	M.,	&	LaRose,	R.	(2000).	“Internet	self-efficacy	
and the psychology of the digital divide.” Journal of 
Computer Mediated Communications, 6(1). 
ebrary. 2008 Global Student E-book Survey Online. Ac-
cessed November 11, 2008. <www.ebrary.com/corp/col-
lateral/en/Survey/ebrary_student_survey_2008.pdf >
Eshet-Alakalai, Yoram. “Digital Literacy: A Conceptual 
Framework for Survival Skills in the Digital Era” Journal 
of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia.13:1(2004), 
93-106.
Femster, Nick and Alexander Gray. “Can great research 
be taught?: independent research with cross-disciplinary 
thinking and broader impact” ACM SIGCSE Bulletin. 
40:1 (2008). 
Holz, Hilary J., Anne Applin, Bruria Haberman, Donald 
Joyce, Helen Purchase, and Catherine Reed December 
“Research methods in computing: what are they, and 
how should we teach them?” ACM SIGCSE Bulletin. 
38:4 (2006) 
Lui, Ziming “Reading behavior in the digital environ-
ment: Changes in reading behavior over the past ten 
years” Journal of Documentation. 61:6 (2005). 700 – 
712
McGreal, R., & Elliott, M. “Technologies of online 
learning (elearning).” Theory and Practice of Online 
Learning. T. Anderson & F. Elloumi (Eds.). Athabasca, 
AB: Athabasca University. 115 – 136.
Milliot, Jim. “Report Finds Growing Acceptance of Dig-
ital Books.” Publishers Weekly. February 18, 2008a.
Milliot, Jim. “Sony Adopts EPUB Standard for Reader.” 
Publishers Weekly. July 24, 2008b.
Owen, Victoria et al. “E-Books in Research Libraries: 
Issues of Access and Use” Online. Accessed November 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 290
11, 2008. <http://www.carl-abrc.ca/projects/copyright/
pdf/CARL%20E-Book%20Report-e.doc>
Polack-Wahl,	 Jennfier	 A.,	 Karen	 Anewalt.	 “Learning	
strategies and undergraduate research” SIGCSE ‘06: 
Proceedings of the 37th SIGCSE technical symposium 
on Computer science education. March 2006, 209-213.
Ruecker, Stan, Kirsten C. Uszkalo. “Binding the Eletron-
ic Book: Design Features for Bibliophiles”. Visible Lan-
guage. 2007.
St. Amant, Robert. “Planning and user interface affor-
dances” Proceedings of the 4th International conference 
on Intelligent user interfaces. Los Angeles, California, 
United States, 1998. 135 – 142.
Sottong, Steven. “The Ellusive E-Book.” American Li-
braries. May 2008, 44-50.
