Image as Markup: Adding 
Semantics to Manuscript Images 
Hugh Cayless 
New York University 
hugh.cayless@nyu.edu
In their article “Images as the Text: Pictographs and Pic-
tographic Logic,” Jerome McGann and Johanna Drucker 
argue	for	the	semantic	significance	of	the	image	of	text,	
using as an example the organization of the text of a 
poem by Byron. They conclude: 
...a	 rhetoric	of	 transparency	makes	 it	difficult	 to	see	be-
yond the moves within the text and the image to under-
stand the metagraphic logic organizing them. In such a 
situation, the study of pictographs, which hover at the 
borderland of text and image, can be especially useful. 
They help us to see that at the next level of abstraction, of 
texts and images as information, similar logical mecha-
nisms are at work. Each instance of text and image is an 
incarnation of such a metalogic, but it can be articulated 
according to its own rules and principles if it is rendered 
explicit. [McGann] 
In the publication of manuscript transcriptions, two 
modes of presentation are typically recognized: the edi-
tion,	 in	which	 an	 editor’s	 supplements	 are	 folded	 into	
the text, and the diplomatic transcription, which attempts 
to faithfully reproduce the text on the original support. 
With the advent of markup systems like the Text Encod-
ing Initiative (TEI), it is possible to produce both types 
of transcription from the same marked up text. Indeed, 
it is possible to go further, and analyze the text in ways 
that print transcriptions cannot, and to link transcriptions 
(and notes) to images in new ways. 
As part of a series of experiments in text and image link-
ing, beginning in the summer of 2008, the author has 
developed a method for generating a Scaleable Vector 
Graphics (SVG) representation of the text in an image of 
a manuscript. [CaylessSVG] This method employs open 
source tools to generate and present the results of the 
SVG tracing. Automated analysis of the SVG output of 
the process is capable (even using a naïve algorithm) of 
detecting lines in the source, and it is not hard to conceive 
of ways to detect words and other features in the image. 
The output of the tracing is in the form of SVG path 
elements, which employ a combination of cubic Bézier 
curves [Bézier] and lines to draw shapes. These can be 
grouped together (using svg:g elements) to, forexample, 
gather the components of a line of text as children of 
a single element. The SVG may include a copy of the 
original image as background, therefore superimposing 
the vector graphic tracings on top of the raster image. 
Since SVG is an XML application, this means that the 
features it represents are manipulable with Javascript, 
offering the possibility of highlighting features, panning 
and zooming, adding hyperlinks, etc. 
In examining ways one might link between an XML 
transcription of the text and an XML overlay of the text, 
one quickly runs into problems involving overlapping 
hierarchies: paths may include multiple letters or words, 
for example, and there may be letters that correspond to 
multiple paths. The process of generating the SVG trac-
ing involves the conversion of the image to a black and 
white (1-bit) bitmap, wherein each pixel is either black 
or white. This makes it possible for the software to re-
produce the shapes in the original source in vector for-
mat,	 but	 it	 also	 involves	 a	flattening	of	 the	 text	 in	 the	
image into a single space. While it might have been clear 
that the stroke of one letter runs over the top of a second 
in a color image, that layering is lost in the SVG, and the 
two letters are a single shape in the output. This may, 
of	course,	involve	the	descender	of	a	letter	‘f’	touching	
the line below, for example, making line detection more 
difficult.	
The	 figure	 below	 (derived	 from	 a	 papyrus	 fragment1) 
highlights some of these issues. Notice that the ini-
tial kappa is represented by no less than eight paths, 
while	part	of	the	downward	stroke	of	the	final	alpha	in	
Original Raster 
Image
SVG Tracing
Transcription
Diplomatic 
Transcription
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 84
κατάξοντα	connects	to	the	following	word,	ἅ.	
These features of the traced text mean that marking a 
word	in	the	image	is	inherently	difficult.	Possible	solu-
tions include modifying the SVG with an editor, so that 
the two letters no longer connect, or adding a new ele-
ment, perhaps just a line added by an editor, to divide 
the two.  The former solution involves doing a certain 
amount of violence to the image, however, since the two 
letters do in fact touch, while the latter introduces a new 
issue: the lack of semantics. 
The semantics of SVG are almost purely geometric. 
It primarily encodes shapes, with additional support 
for links, text, embedded images, and animation. This 
means	 there	 is	 no	 inherent	way	 to	 express	 the	 signifi-
cance of a grouping or a feature in SVG. If we introduce 
the idea of a line that can break paths representing letters 
or words, then in order to be able to use this feature to, 
for	example,	point	to	the	whole	word	κατάξοντα	in	the	
SVG,	we	would	first	need	a	process	that	could	find	the	
intersection points of the word-dividing line and the path 
representing the two alphas, and then split that path into 
two derivative paths, each of which would be associated 
with a different word.  This method would avoid dam-
age to the actual tracing while allowing the types of ref-
erence that are likely to be useful. The derivative paths 
could be placed in the same document and only activated 
as needed. 
Again, however, there is a need for semantics in the SVG 
document.  Not only might it be necessary to differen-
tiate between lines dividing letters and lines dividing 
words or lines of text so that a processor knows how to 
deal with them and their outputs, but it must also be pos-
sible to distinguish between the derived paths and the 
originals, since there is no inherent difference between 
one svg:path element and another.  They may render in 
the same coordinate space, for example, even though 
they are in different parts of the document. 
Some possibilities for adding semantics to SVG in-
clude embedding metadata (perhaps using RDF) using 
the svg:metadata element, or developing a microformat, 
perhaps	 depending	 on	 the	 @class	 attribute,	 which	 is	
available on all displayable elements.[Schepers] These 
kinds of semantic “hooks” will be absolutely necessary 
if linking between the many possible structures in the 
transcription and the SVG are to be achieved. Some ex-
amples of the types of functionality that can be enabled 
by the technology described here are: 
1. linking from notes, such as a description of letter 
forms, to actual examples inthe image.
2. The ability to link/zoom to any part of the text in the 
image from the transcription.
3. Image search with highlighted results.
4. Marking editorial emendations, such as expanded 
abbreviations and other types of editorial addition 
or deletion on the image itself.
Put another way, the semantics of the graphical repre-
sentation of the text can be made explicit, by means of 
embedding and linking information into markup that it-
self overlays an image of the text, making for a very rich 
presentation and research tool. 
Notes
1See http://papyri.info//navigator/full/apis_
michigan_1769 
References 
Bézier curve - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Re-
trieved November 14, 2008, from http:// en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/B%C3%A9zier_curve. [Bézier] 
Cayless, H. “Linking Page Images to Transcriptions 
with SVG.” Presented at Balisage: The Markup Confer-
ence, 12 - 15 August 2008. In Proceedings of Balisage: 
The Markup Conference (2008). Retrieved November 
14, 2008, from http://www.balisage.net/ Proceedings/
html/2008/Cayless01/Balisage2008-Cayless01.html. 
Drucker, J., & McGann, J. “Images as the Text: Pic-
tographs and Pictorgraphic Logic.” Retrieved Octo-
ber 28, 2008, from http://jefferson.village.virginia.
edu/%7Ejjm2f/old/ pictograph.html. [McGann] 
Schepers, D. A. “Reinventing Fire >> Blog Archive >> 
SVG Text, Semantics, and Accessibility.” November 
7th, 2006 at 5:24 am. Retrieved November 13, 2008, 
from http://schepers.cc/? p=11. [Schepers] 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  85
