Interactive Visual Analysis 
of Personal Names in
Japanese Historical Diary
Alejandro Toledo
Ritsumeikan University
alex@ice.ci.ritsumei.ac.jp
Ruck Thawonmas
Ritsumeikan University
ruck@ci.ritsumei.ac.jp
Akira Maeda
Ritsumeikan University
amaeda@media.ritsumei.ac.jp
Fuminori Kimura
Ritsumeikan University 
fkimura@is.ritsumei.ac.jp
Historical diaries provide information about and facilitate understanding of daily life during their 
periods. The historical diary of an aristocrat not only 
contains historic facts but might also help us disclose 
them. In this paper, we present an interactive web-based 
system for visualizing aristocrat names mentioned in a 
historical Japanese diary called “Hyohanki” written by 
an aristocrat during the late Heian era (1132-1184). In 
our web-based system, the stacked graph is utilized to 
dynamically analyze the time-series of those aristocrat 
names. We have found that trends in the name occur-
rence and co-occurrence visualized by the system cor-
relate well with historic facts regarding the rise and fall 
of power of as well as the confrontation among the cor-
responding aristocrats.
1. Introduction
A diary is a daily record of events that have happened 
over the course of a day. Diaries written long time ago 
or historical diaries provide information about daily life 
during their periods. They can be also utilized to facili-
tate understanding of the life and times of mentioned 
individuals in those days. Historical diaries written by 
aristocrats not only contain historic facts but might also 
help us disclose such facts.
Information visualization techniques have been success-
fully applied to historical artifacts. Typical applications 
include	Picasso’s	artworks	and	documents	(Audenaert	et	
al., 2008; Meneses et al., 2008), 17th-century Portuguese 
shipbuilding	treatises	(Furuta	et	al.,	2007),	and	Vertot’s	
Roman Revolutions (Jensen, 2006). In this paper, we ap-
ply information visualization to a historical diary called 
“Hyohanki (or Heihanki)” which is a diary written by a 
Japanese aristocrat, Taira no Nobunori, during the late 
Heian era (1132-1184). 
Hyohanki is a relevant resource for the research of Japa-
nese culture of that time period. Although some part 
of Hyohanki has been deteriorated and missing, all re-
maining pages are digitized into the text format (Fig. 1), 
awaiting for digital humanities research activities. An 
example of such digital humanities research is Cross-
Age and Cross-Cultural Information Retrieval discussed 
in (Maeda and Kimura, 2008).
In this paper, we present an interactive web-based sys-
tem1 for visualizing aristocrat names mentioned in Hyo-
hanki. In our system, the stacked graph (Wattenberg, 
2005) is utilized to dynamically analyze the time-series 
of those aristocrat names. This kind of dynamic analysis 
helps the viewer to track trends in the name occurrence 
and co-occurrence and thus facilitates revealing of his-
toric facts behind them. 
Fig. 1 Example of a digitized page of historical Japanese 
diary “Hyohanki”
2. Methodology 
2.1 Data 
Our system is based on entries derived from the Hyo-
hanki Diary. Such entries, contained in a delimited text 
file,	are	expressed	by	a	tabular	representation	consisting	
of three attributes: (i) year, (ii) aristocrat name for which 
the family name is placed before the given name, and 
(iii) a numerical value indicating the number of occur-
rences of that name in that year. This data was extracted 
from “Personal Names Index” of Hyohanki, which was 
manually created by experts in Japanese history.
2.2 Visualization 
The method used to visualize the data is straightfor-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  279
ward: given a set of aristocrat-names time series, a set 
of stacked graphs is produced, as shown in Fig. 2. The 
x axis corresponds to year and the y axis to occurrence 
ratio, in percentage, for all names currently in view. Each 
stripe represents a name, and the width of the stripe is 
proportional to the ratio of that name mentioned in a giv-
en year. The stripes are colored blue, and the brightness 
of each stripe varies according to the number of occur-
rences, so that the most mentioned names for the whole 
period are darkest and stand out the most. 
Fig. 2 Screenshot of our Hyohanki’s aristocrat-names 
visualization system, where the English names of those 
discussed in the paper were manually superimposed under 
the corresponding Japanese names 
Our visualization approach can be seen as an evolved 
version of timeline representations (Jensen, 2006). The 
main difference between these two approaches is that 
timeline representations are suitable to highlight the 
temporal evolution of events, while stacked graph rep-
resentations help users in discovering trends in data. In 
a typical timeline presentation, time is arranged along 
one dimension and a number of markers, representing 
events, are placed appropriately along the time dimen-
sion. On the other hand, stacked graph representations 
often create an environment being representative of the 
data set in question.  This environment helps users in 
discovering trends in data by creating depictions of data 
values that can make data analysis faster.
2.3 Interaction 
When the system starts, the viewer sees a set of stripes 
representing all names with the number of occurrences 
above	 50.	Additional	 filtering	 of	 this	 data	 is	 achieved	
using	two	interaction	controls.	With	the	first	one,	filter-
ing by names, the viewer may type in letters, forming a 
prefix;	our	system	will	then	visualize	data	on	only	those	
names	beginning	with	that	prefix.	This	system	reacts	di-
rectly with each keystroke. Thereby, it is not necessary 
for the viewer to press return or to click a submit button. 
In addition, the system moves smoothly between visu-
alization states. So when a letter is typed, an animated 
transition helps preserve the visualization context. 
With the second interaction control, filtering by number 
of occurrences, the viewer can change the data currently 
in use from the default. As shown in Fig. 2, there are sev-
en buttons, each one allowing the change using the num-
ber of occurrences above 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300 and 
350 respectively. The idea behind this interaction control 
is that we can restrict the view to certain data of interest, 
according to their number of occurrences, resulting in 
concise views of the data.
3. Results and Discussions 
Fig. 2 shows the stacked graph of the aristocrat names 
with the number of occurrences above 50. One promi-
nent stripe can be observed, i.e., that of Fujiwara no 
Tadamichi (藤原忠通), who was the eldest son of the 
Japanese regent Fujiwara no Tadazane (藤原忠実). It 
should be noted that in 1156 the Hogen Rebellion took 
place between the defeating side of Emperor Go-Shi-
rakawa, sided by Fujiwara no Tadamichi, and the de-
feated side of retired Emperor Sutoku, sided by Fujiwara 
no Yorinaga who is the younger brother of Fujiwara no 
Tadazane.
Fig. 3 Stack graphs of names beginning with Fujiwara 
(藤原), where the English names of those discussed 
in the paper were manually superimposed under the 
corresponding Japanese names 
Fig. 3 shows the stacked graph of the aristocrats with 
family name Fujiwara (藤原), a powerful regent fam-
ily dominating the Japanese politics of Heian period, 
and with the number of occurrences above 100. It can 
be seen that the stripe of Fujiwara no Yorinaga (藤原
頼長) has high co-occurrence with that of Fujiwara no 
Tadamichi until the former was defeated by the latter in 
the aforementioned rebellion. It is also interesting to see 
that the stripe of their father Fujiwara no Tadazane also 
conforms to this trend. It should be noted that the y-axis 
is always the total percentage.  This is because we are 
interested	in	the	relative	transition	of	the	influence	of	a	
particular family or a person, and for that purpose, the 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 280
total percentage is better than the relative percentage.
In addition, in Fig. 3, Fujiwara no Motozane (藤原基
実) has high occurrence before 1166, but his occurrence 
decreases after 1166. On the other hand, Fujiwara no 
Motofusa (藤原基房) has low occurrence before 1166, 
but has high occurrence after 1166. These also conform 
to the following historical fact. In 1166, a regime change 
occurred. Before 1166, Emperor Nijo group was in pow-
er. However, Emperor Nijo, the eldest son of the afore-
mentioned Emperor Go-Shirakawa, died in 1165, and 
Fujiwara no Motozane who was the leader of the em-
peror Nijo group also died in 1166. Their death triggered 
the emperor Nijo group to lose their political power. Af-
ter their death, Emperor Go-shirakawa regained political 
power. Ultimately, Fujiwara no Motofusa was appointed 
as the leader of the regime.
4. Conclusions and future work
We have successfully applied the stacked graph to visu-
alization of aristocrat names in the Hyohanki diary. Two 
interaction	controls	are	provided,	i.e.,	filtering	by	names	
and	filtering	by	number	of	occurrences.	They	allow	the	
viewer	to	search	names	by	prefix	and	to	narrow	the	target	
names, respectively. Interesting trends have been found 
that correlate well with the corresponding historic facts.
As our future work, we plan to use data mining tech-
niques to the diary in order to obtain structural repre-
sentations other than the tabular one used in the current 
work. In the current version of our system, tabulated data 
are visualized by means of a time-line that tells us trends 
of aristocrats names mentioned in the diary. We believe 
that	using	data	mining	techniques	will	allow	us	to	find	
new useful information, such as place names, building 
names, and street names, that eventually leads to differ-
ent graphical representations.
Notes
1http://www.ice.ci.ritsumei.ac.jp/~ruck/IV/Hyohanki.
html
References 
Audenaert, N., Lucchese, G., Sherrick, G., and Fu-
ruta, R. (2008). CritSpace: Using Spatial Hypertext to 
Model Visually Complex Documents. Book of abstracts 
for the DH2008 conference, Oulu, Finland, pp. 50-53.
Furuta, R., Castro, F., and Monroy, C. (2007). Ancient 
Technical Manuscripts: the Case of 17th-century Portu-
guese Shipbuilding Treatises. Book of abstracts for the 
DH2007 conference, University of Illinois, USA, pp. 
67-69.
Jensen, M. (2006). Semantic Timeline Tools for History 
and Criticism. Book of abstracts for the DH2006 confer-
ence, Sorbonne, Paris, pp. 67-69.
Maeda, A. and Kimura, F. (2008). An Approach to 
Cross-Age and Cross-Cultural Information Access for 
Digital Humanities. Digital Resources for the Humani-
ties and Arts 2008 Conference (DRHA08), Cambridge, 
U.K., Sep. 
Meneses, L., Furuta, R., Mallen, E. (2008). Exploring 
the Biography and Artworks of Picasso with Interac-
tive Calendars and Timelines. Book of abstracts for the 
DH2008 conference, Oulu, Finland, pp. 160-163.
Wattenberg, M. (2005). Baby names, visualization, and 
social data analysis. Proceeding of IEEE Symposium on 
Information Visualization 2005 (InfoVis2005), pp. 1–7.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  281
