Integrating Images and Text 
with Common Data and 
Metadata Standards in the 
Archimedes Palimpsest 
Doug Emery
Emery IT
doug@emeryit.com
Michael B. Toth 
Walters Art Museum/R. B. Toth Associates
mbt.rbtoth@gmail.com
This paper by the Archimedes Palimpsest program and data managers will discuss the issues, chal-
lenges and decisions related to the integration of all im-
ages and transcriptions of the Archimedes Palimpsest in 
digital form. This will include discussion of the manage-
ment of image and transcription data, adoption of meta-
data and text encoding standards and schemas, and chal-
lenges faced in integrating these data during this 10-year 
long program and use in follow-on efforts. 
This	paper	will	address	the	integration	of	scientific	and	
scholarly data through the application of best practices 
in standardized metadata to images and XML transcrip-
tions, and challenges encountered in applying the vari-
ous	imaging,	identification	and	encoding	standards.		This	
will include discussion of the following: 
1. The effective implementation of broadly accepted 
metadata models and data architectures; 
2. Integration of integrated data standards, including 
Dublin Core and Text Encoding Initiative; and 
3. Embedding metadata elements within the data itself 
for effective preservation and archiving, as well as 
spatial linkage of data elements. 
On 22 October, 1998, the Archimedes Palimpsest was 
sold at auction for $2.0 million to an anonymous buyer. 
A multidisciplinary team of conservators, imaging sci-
entists, scholars, and information technology profes-
sionals disbound, conserved, digitally imaged, analyzed 
and transcribed the 184 parchment pages for continued 
study.  The program applied advanced spectral imaging 
to	study	the	Archimedes	and	other	significant	medieval	
manuscripts from the 10th century that were copied over 
by 13th-century prayer book text. On October 29, 2008, 
the approximately 1 Terabyte of Archimedes Palimpsest 
integrated image and transcription data were released 
to the public for free use. Integrating the ancient Greek 
transcriptions	 of	Archimedes’	 mathematical	 texts	 with	
digital images and hosting them on the Web for a broad 
set of global users posed a complex set of information 
sharing challenges. 
The Archimedes Palimpsest Digital Product required 
the integration of imaging, scholarly and data products. 
The product incorporates registered images for each leaf 
linked spatially to diplomatic transcriptions that schol-
ars initially created in various nonstandard formats, with 
associated standardized metadata. Imaging scientists in-
cluded Dr. Roger Easton Jr. from the Rochester Institute 
of Technology, Dr. Keith Knox from Boeing Corpora-
tion, and Dr. Bill Christens-Barry from Equipoise Imag-
ing, and a camera provided by Stokes Imaging, supported 
by John R. Stokes.  The imaging effort built on imaging 
of the Dead Sea Scrolls by a team from RIT and the Brit-
ish National Gallery Vasari Project, while the transcrip-
tion encoding effort built on the work of the Homer Mul-
titext Project by the Center for Hellenic Studies. With 
over 4,000 digital images in 12 spectral bands and 140 
pages of transcriptions of the original writings in Greek 
of Archimedes and Hyperides, standardized metadata 
was critical to 1) access to and integration of images for 
digital processing and enhancement, 2) management of 
transcriptions from those images, and 3) linkage of the 
images with the transcriptions. 
This effort produced images and transcriptions of the 
only copies of Archimedes treatises The Method and 
Stomachion; the only copy in Greek of On Floating 
Bodies; and copies of the Equilibrium of Planes, Spi-
ral Lines, The Measurement of the Circle, and Sphere 
and Cylinder. It also discovered ten pages of text by the 
fourth century B.C. Attic Greek orator Hyperides; six fo-
lios	from	a	still	unidentified	Neo-Platonic	philosophical	
text that may be commentaries on Aristotle; four folios 
from a liturgical book; and twelve pages from two other 
books, the text of which has yet to be deciphered. These 
texts are being studied by scholars from a range of col-
leges and universities, including Oxford, Cambridge, 
Stanford, and Eötvös Loránd (Budapest) Universities. 
These scholars bring not only the knowledge and abil-
ity to read the sometimes almost illegible ancient Greek 
text	and	diagrams,	but	also	significant	knowledge	of	the	
science, mathematics, law and philosophy discussed in 
the texts. Capturing this data from a range of scholars 
and rendering it in a common, standardized digital for-
mat	 required	 establishment	 of	 a	 program	 specification	
for transcribed text. 
Beginning in 2001, the Archimedes Palimpsest program 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 282
adopted established metadata standards to ensure key 
parameters were recorded during technical collection 
for use in subsequent processing and studies, including 
Dublin Core and Text Encoding Initiative guidelines. 
These	standards	have	been	 further	 refined	and	adapted	
to address the needs of scholars, imaging scientists, con-
servation and preservation professionals, and informa-
tion and data managers.  Working with the scholars, the 
program developed a Transcription Integration Plan for 
the Archimedes Palimpsest Program that incorporated 
the Unicode, Dublin Core and Text Encoding Initiative 
Standards and Guidelines, which proved essential to the 
integration of the transcribed information. The selection 
of broadly accepted and up-to-date international consen-
sus standards is an effort to ensure currency, increase the 
likelihood of long-term data viability, and provide for 
ample documentation to describe the bit structure of all 
archive components, from the core data to the supporting 
files.	The	program	also	developed	a	system	architecture	
that was documented with archival, metadata and inte-
gration plans and implemented after extensive review 
and	modifications.	
The construction of the data set addresses the special 
problem of building an archive for today and the distant 
future.  A guiding principle of the archive is the integra-
tion of data and metadata components, following princi-
ples described in the Consultative Committee for Space 
Data Systems (CCSDS) Reference Model for an Open 
Archival Information System (OAIS). Each image bears 
embedded	 identifying,	 spatial,	 scientific,	 format,	 and	
content metadata in its header.  Each directory contains 
all images for a given folio side, accompanying XMP 
metadata	files,	checksum	data,	and	spatially	mapped	TEI	
XML transcriptions for the Archimedes and Hyperides 
texts.	 	Each	 image	file	 or	 folio	 directory	 forms	 a	 self-
contained unit of data and preservation information.  The 
directory	 as	 a	whole	 provides	 files	 that	 guide	 users	 to	
the data and document the data set and the technologies 
comprised in it.  A simple, documented archive structure 
supports the discoverability and accessibility of the data. 
The archive, the transcriptions, and supporting meta-
data are designed to support the core image data using 
broadly accepted standards.  The key to the process-
ing and presentation of the Archimedes image data is 
the registration of all the images of a single folio side 
to one another.  These relationships are documented in 
and	exploited	by	the	supporting	files	and	metadata.		The	
project-developed Archimedes Palimpsest Metadata 
Standard (APMS) provides a metadata structure spe-
cifically	geared	to	relating	all	 images	of	a	folio	side	in	
a single multi- or hyper-spectral data “cube.” It relates 
the components of this cube to the imaged object, the 
conditions and systems used in its imaging, the standards 
and	 techniques	used	 to	generate	 the	digital	file,	and	fi-
nally the standards used to document this components. 
Each image has embedded in it its own metadata and so 
may stand alone or be related to any or all of the other 
members of the same cube.  The standard is based on the 
Dublin Core metadata elements and Federal Geographic 
Data	Committee’s	(FGDC)	Content	Standard	for	Digital	
Geospatial Metadata. The included transcriptions, writ-
ten in compliance with TEI release P5, support the imag-
es and serve as a kind of metadata.  For the majority, 142 
of 180 folio sides, each is provided with a transcription. 
In those transcriptions, each line is mapped to a rectan-
gular region of the related images.  The TEI <facsim-
ile> element and its children are used for this purpose. 
These digital transcriptions provide a machine-readable 
tool that document the content of the images.  The spatial 
mapping allows easy mapping from transcription to im-
age and vice versa. 
The use of standardized data sets allows the hosting and 
integration of image and textual data, as well as data 
from other cultural works, across a range of services pro-
viders, libraries and cultural and educational institutions, 
and the separate development of graphical user inter-
faces (GUIs) by users as needed. Inclusion of standards 
as part of the data set will help ensure the data will be 
readily searchable, available and accessible for studies 
in decades to come. 
Additional information on this program is available at 
the Archimedes Palimpsest website 
References
Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, Dublin Core Metadata 
Element Set, Version 1.1., 14 Jan., 2008. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  283
