In the Header, but Where? 
Syd Bauman 
Brown University 
Syd_Bauman@Brown.edu
Dorothy Carr Porter  
Digital Humanities Observatory 
dot.porter@gmail.com
The TEI header is a valuable but sometimes over-looked part of a TEI document. The header is the 
main source of documentation for a TEI encoded elec-
tronic document, and has been created to describe “an 
encoded work so that the text itself, its source, its encod-
ing, and its revisions are all thoroughly documented.”i It 
is described as an electronic analogue to the title page of 
a printed book, but it is really much more than that. The 
header provides a location to place any kind of informa-
tion about a text that should not or need not be described 
within the body of the text itself—for example, narrative 
descriptions of a series of illustrations, or of individual 
illustrations;	definitions	of	 terms	that	occur	in	 the	text;	
demographic information about the people involved in 
the creation of the text, its TEI transcription, or men-
tioned in the text; even complete descriptions of physical 
objects (using the <msDescription> element). All 
these can be placed in the header and then linked to pas-
sages in the body of the text using one or more of a va-
riety of available linking mechanisms. This combination 
of digital textual data (stored in <text>) and digital 
header metadata (stored in <teiHeader>) provides a 
method	for	description	 that	 is	generally	clear	and	flex-
ible. Witness that several other popular XML vocabular-
ies use an analogous system of separating metadata from 
data immediately as the two children of the root node, 
with	the	metadata	coming	first.	(Notably	XHTMLii and 
DocBookiii follow this pattern.) However, the placement 
of	certain	specific	metadata	within	the	header	is	not	al-
ways so clear. 
The TEI Guidelines often recommend that users place 
a	specific	piece	or	kind	of	metadata	 in	 the	TEI	header,	
but sometimes they do not specify into which area of 
the header the particular information should be placed. 
E.g., the <gap> element “indicates a point where ma-
terial has been omitted in a transcription, whether for 
editorial reasons described in the TEI header, as part 
of sampling practice, or because...”. However, a search 
through the chapter on the TEI header does not clearly 
suggest where exactly those editorial reasons should 
be described (although there is an example of <sam-
plingDecl> which does explain the use of <gap> 
for editorial reasons). 
There are some 218 references to the TEI header in the 
source of the TEI Guidelines that are neither within the 
chapter that directly discusses the TEI header, nor are 
within an example, a heading, or the <teiHeader> of 
the TEI Guidelines themselves. In how many of these in-
stances do the Guidelines make clear recommendations? 
And when there are no clear guidelines, how do users 
decide how to use the header? 
In our paper, we will answer the question “in how many 
places do the TEI Guidelines recommend placing in-
formation in the TEI header, but do not specify exactly 
where?”.  Furthermore, we hope to examine each such 
occurrence in some more detail, even recommending 
where such information be placed for as many occur-
rences as possible. 
For some such occurrences, we also hope to ask a set of 
TEI users where they are placing this information, or, if 
they do not happen to need to record this particular type 
of metadata, where they would be inclined to place it if 
they did. 
Finally, based on the research conducted, we hope to be 
able to come to some broad conclusions as to how much 
of a problem this issue actually represents. 
We	will	first	study	the	Guidelines	to	find	all	the	instances	
where users are told to use the header, but are not told 
exactly how. We will then conduct at least informal 
conversations with TEI users (both long-term users and 
novices), if not use a formal survey instrument, to try to 
ascertain how they do (or would be inclined to) act in the 
given situations. We will discuss what impact the solu-
tions users come up with might have on both interchange 
and interoperability. We will also attempt to ascertain 
how much of a perceived problem this issue really pres-
ents for these users. Our own experience with the TEI, as 
users and developers, will also be helpful for this study. 
Finally, for as many of the cases for which the TEI 
Guidelines	 do	 not	make	 a	 specific	 recommendation	 as	
possible, we will attempt to provide a suggestion for pre-
cisely where in the TEI header the information should be 
placed. We do this with the hope that it will both improve 
the interchange the TEI supports, and lower the barrier to 
adoption of TEI by new projects. 
iBurnard, Lou and Syd Bauman, eds. “The TEI Head-
er”  Guidelines for Electronic Text Encoding and Inter-
change. 2007-11-01. http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  69
tei-p5¬doc/html/HD.html (24 Nov 2007). 
ii“XHTML” The Extensible HyperText Markup Lan-
guage (Second Edition). 2002-08-01. http://www.
w3.org/TR/xhtml1/ (24 Nov 2007). 
iiiWalsh, Norm and Leonard Muellner. DocBook, The De-
finitive Guide.	O’Reilly,	1999.	urn:isbn:1-56592-580-7.	
