Language and Image:  T3 = Text, 
Tags, and Trust
Judith L. Klavans
University of Maryland, College Park 
jklavans@umd.edu
Susan Chun
Independent Museum Consultant, NY 
susan@susanchun.com
Jennifer Golbeck
University of Maryland, College Park 
golbeck@cs.umd.edu
Dagobert Soergel 
University of Maryland, College Park 
dsoergel@umd.edu
Robert Stein
Indianapolis Museum of Art 
rstein@imamuseum.org
Ed Bachta
Indianapolis Museum of Art 
ebachta@imamuseum.org
Rebecca LaPlante
University of Maryland, College Park 
laplante@umd.edu 
Carolyn	Sheffield
University of Maryland, College Park 
csheffie@umd.edu 
Kate Mayo
University of Maryland, College Park 
kmayo1@umd.edu
John Kleint
University of Maryland, College Park 
jkleint@umd.edu 
In this paper, we present on a new project, “T3: Text, Tags, and Trust to Improve Image Access for Mu-
seums and Libraries”, the goal of which is to improve 
access to digital image collections in museums and li-
braries for art historians, museum professionals, and the 
general public. T3 combines text mining, social tagging, 
and trust inferencing to enrich metadata and personalize 
retrieval. We report on an experiment in which users tag 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 182
a selected set of controversial images; with these tags, 
similarity	profiles	are	created	for	subjects	to	build	an	ini-
tial trust network based on agreement or disagreement. 
By processing related text through the CLiMB toolkit, 
we have a third source of evidence for evaluating the 
role of trust and for assessing the relationship between 
tags and text terms.  We will present collection criteria, 
including	image	selection,	text	identification	and	choice,	
and interface choices for data collection and analysis.
The fundamental and driving research issue in this proj-
ect concerns the relationship between the language of 
image description and an image itself.  The University 
of	Maryland’s	 Institute	 for	Advanced	 Computer	 Stud-
ies and College of Information Studies, the Indianapo-
lis Museum of Art, and fourteen other museums have 
joined to conduct research on new methods to improve 
user access to digital image collections in museums and 
libraries.  Studies on image searching indicate that cur-
rent subject description and cataloging practices in mu-
seums, libraries and other art historical collections are 
inadequate for many end user needs. Trant, et al. 2007, 
as part of the steve.museum project, report that search 
behaviors for users of the Guggenheim collection do not 
match the descriptive practices of museum personnel. 
This disconnect results in unsatisfactory and unsuccess-
ful image access for users. Similarly, in Klavans et al. 
2008, observations of image cataloging practices in aca-
demic visual resource centers reveal that typical records 
include less than eight subject terms per image with 
many records containing no subject terms at all. Social 
tagging is a way to obtain richer, more varied, and more 
user-oriented subject terms. However, social tagging 
brings with it the problem of authority and trust: Whose 
authority is a given user prepared to accept? Whose tags 
does she want to trust to retrieve relevant images? (Trant 
and Wyman 2006, Axelrod, Golbeck and Shneiderman 
2005).
T3 is a collaborative, cross-disciplinary project com-
prised of academic researchers, digital librarians, and 
museum professionals. We explore the application of 
techniques from computational linguistics and social 
tagging to the creation of linkages between the formal 
academic language of museums and the vernacular lan-
guage of social tagging. We use text mining algorithms, 
taxonomies, and lexical resources to identify suggested 
terms and aid users in tagging images and then retriev-
ing images based on tags assigned from many different 
perspectives. We use the trust a user places in particular 
metadata sources, e.g. other users or other sources, to 
infer a weighted set of results for their searches. Consid-
eration of these weights in ranking algorithms—along 
with term relationships from lexical resources—has the 
potential to produce high-quality, focused, personalized 
retrieval of works from image collections.
The T3 integrated system builds on three prior research 
prototypes:
1. CLiMB (Text Mining for Terms): Applies compu-
tational linguistic techniques to mine texts associ-
ated with images for terms which are then disam-
biguated, mapped to standard ontologies such as the 
AAT, and reviewed by museum and library staff for 
enriching image catalog records with high-quality 
subject metadata.
2. Steve.museum (Tagging): Uses on social tagging of 
images for generating metadata and engaging mu-
seum audiences. The current project uses steve tools 
and methods to explore the roles and usefulness of 
non-expert enthusiasts in enhancing existing docu-
mentation.
3. FilmTrust (Trust Inferencing): Incorporates trust 
networks to assign trust values. By gathering input 
on	users’	preferred	sources,	including	other	users,	a	
trust network automatically assigns values, sourced 
from both text mining and tagging, based on user 
perspectives. T3 will explore the process of extend-
ing	 trust	 of	 other	 users’	 opinions	 (i.e.,	 “this	 user	
likes the same works I like”) to generate values for 
image descriptions.  
This project addresses fundamental research questions in 
the area of digital image access.  Armed with answers 
to basic research issues, we are able to design environ-
ments for improved image access and improved user 
experience.  Research issues include examination of hy-
pothesis to:
•	 Improve	the	user	experience	in	finding	works	of	art	
and interacting with works of art and collections.  
•	 Improve the understanding the relationship between 
language and visual art, including the use of facets 
and other knowledge structures to elicit useful tags 
and assist users in searching
•	 Examine the relationships, associations, and link-
ages	between	terms	from	different	sources,	specifi-
cally from users, text-mining, and cataloging.
•	 Study when and how an understanding of sources 
impacts the value of terms to users and museums, 
and personalizes the user experience. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  183
Our hypothesis is that through disambiguation and trust 
information,	we	can	filter	out	excess	terms	and	rank	ac-
ceptable terms.  This provides users with the capability to 
adjust their preferred threshold for precision over recall, 
or	the	reverse.	Specifically,	disambiguating	terms	using	
a faceted thesaurus provides users with the ability to nar-
row	or	 expand	 their	 searches	 based	 on	 clearly	 defined	
concepts.  For the trust component, we gather input from 
users on which sources (people or text) they trust to help 
us judge how much trust and authority to give to the tags/
terms originating from these sources.  The trust and au-
thority	“ratings”	for	tags	will	be	used	to	filter	them	and/
or order the way they are presented. This helps users by 
showing them the most trusted and authoritative terms 
first,	thus	facilitating	the	user’s	perusal	of	query	results.	
Dynamic	personalization	of	 these	filters	helps	 the	user	
by producing trusted, focused results for queries.
Our initial experiments will explore how users 
judge trust in this context. Our subjects will tag a se-
ries of images and then will rate how much they trust 
a source (people or text) based on the tags/terms it 
applied to the same images. Using this data, we will 
analyze how similarity in tags/terms relates to trust val-
ues and if there are particular types of words that have a 
stronger	influence	on	trust	(e.g.	emotion	words	vs.	color	
words). These insights will provide the basis for an ini-
tial implementation of our prototype that personalizes 
search results based on trust.  The tagging interface for 
this experiment is shown in Figure One:
Figure 1. Controversial Image for Tagging for Trust 
Experiment
T3 is building an open source working prototype for ana-
lyzing and processing terms which serve multiple user 
communities and allow us to:
•	 Develop and test new methodologies that group au-
thoritative terms and social tags based on concep-
tual and semantic relationships
•	 Test trust-based personalization of results for differ-
ent user groups
•	 Research the potential of these new technologies for 
engaging museum audiences and their impact on the 
evolving professional landscape of image access
T3 is funded as a National Leadership Grant by the U.S. 
Institute for Museum and Library Services. The project is 
led by Dr. Judith Klavans of the University of Maryland, 
Robert Stein of the Indianapolis Museum of Art, and 
Susan Chun, Independent Cultural Heritage Consultant. 
Dr. Jennifer Golbeck, Assistant Professor in the College 
of Information Studies at the University of Maryland, is 
co-PI leads the trust component of the research, and Dr. 
Dagobert Soergel, Professor in the College of Informa-
tion Studies at the University of Maryland, leads ontol-
ogy and knowledge representation aspect of T3.   The 
museum working group is providing users, catalogers, 
content, and feedback to aid in the research.
Selected References
Axelrod, Adam, Jennifer Golbeck, and Ben Shneider-
man (2005), Generating and Querying Semantic Web 
Environments for Photo Libraries Technical Report, 
University of Maryland, Department of Computer Sci-
ence, http://drum.umd.edu.
Trant, Jennifer, David Bearman, and Susan Chun (2007) 
The eye of the beholder: steve.museum and social tag-
ging of museum collections, in Proceedings of the In-
ternational Cultural Heritage Informatics Meeting 
(ICHIM07), J. Trant and D. Bearman (eds). Toronto: 
Archives & Museum Informatics. 2007. http://www.ar-
chimuse.com/ichim07/papers/trant/trant.html.
Klavans,	 Judith	 L,	 Carolyn	 Sheffield,	 Eileen	 Abels,	
Jimmy Lin, Rebecca Passonneau, Tandeep Sidhu, and 
Dagobert Soergel (2009) Computational Linguistics for 
Metadata Building (CLiMB): Using Text Mining for the 
Automatic	 Identification,	 Categorization,	 and	 Disam-
biguation of Subject Terms for Image Metadata. Jour-
nal of Multimedia Tools and Applications, Special issue 
on Metadata Mining for Image Understanding (MMIU) 
42(1):115-138.  Elsevier: Paris.
Trant, Jennifer and Bruce Wyman (2006). Investigat-
ing social tagging and folksonomy in art museums with 
steve.museum. Paper presented at the World Wide Web 
2006: Tagging Workshop. http://www.archimuse.com/
research/www2006-tagging-steve.pdf.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 184
