Library as Agent of  
[Re]Contextualization
Vika Zafrin 
Boston University 
vzafrin@bu.edu	 
Jack Ammerman 
Boston University 
jwa@bu.edu
Garth Green 
Boston University 
gwgreen@bu.edu
Rapid production, dissemination and consumption of knowledge made possible in our digital culture is 
often accompanied by atomization of information. Once 
digitized, bits of information can easily be presented 
in a de-contextualized manner. This is both good and 
bad: any given datum lends itself more explicitly to be-
ing used in different, perhaps unexpected contexts; but 
without an originating context that is at least as widely 
known	as	the	datum	itself,	it	is	difficult	to	find	in	the	first	
place. 
In his Everything is Miscellaneous: The Power of the 
New Digital Disorder (2007), David Weinberger has 
presented three orders – levels – of ordering. First or-
der he likened to arranging books on a shelf, working 
with the objects themselves. Second order is creating a 
card catalog for the books – making objects to represent 
other objects, where each representative object refers to 
one	and	only	one	primary	object	(but	the	reverse	doesn’t	
hold:	a	book	can	have	several	catalog	cards,	filed	by	dif-
ferent criteria). 
Third order does not presume an object to exist in only 
one	place	at	a	time.	“The	problems	with	the	first	two	or-
ders of order go back to the fact that they arrange atoms,” 
Weinberger writes. “But now we have bits. [...] The third 
order	 removes	 the	 limitations	we’ve	assumed	were	 in-
evitable in how we organize information.” 
This breakdown of “degrees of separation” between the 
things being ordered and the entities that order them is 
hardly new. In the 13th century, Bonaventure present-
ed three possible “positions of thought”: extra se (the 
mind views an outside object), intra se	 (a	 reflectio,	 or	
a	 ‘thought	 about	 [an	 achieved]	 thought’)	 and	 supra se 
(where we examine the principles behind our own classi-
fication	and	organization	of	observed	knowledge).	[Itin-
erarium 1, 4 and Reductio 10-12] Bonaventure merely 
systematized the tripartite structure of theology (sensi-
ble, symbolic and speculative) that he had inherited from 
such philosophers and theologians as Plotinus, Augus-
tine, and pseudo-Dionysius. 
The compelling common aspect of the third order of or-
der, the supra se position of thought and the Absolute 
Idea, is recombination, re-iteration, a multiple contex-
tualization of knowledge. Libraries have traditionally 
dwelt in the second order of order. At Boston University 
we have been playing with the notion of a library serving 
as a locus for third-order processes. This paper is a spec-
ulative discussion; we are re-conceiving library spaces 
as workshop-oriented, and collection development as 
a third-order activity based on the mash-up principle. 
We imagine the library as responsible for three spaces 
– physical, virtual and programmatic. This refashioned, 
multifaceted institution is an entity that not only enables 
research but engenders and even generates new knowl-
edge by way of a new physical and conceptual structure. 
Programmatic Space 
Faculty members have expressed the desire for commu-
nity in many places and contexts. What exactly do they 
mean, and is this something to which the library can re-
spond? How do we create a physical community space 
for faculty in a large institution? How do we get people 
to engage with us and each other online? 
Both the physical and the virtual spaces of the library, 
discussed below, are necessarily informed by a program-
matic space – the conceptual framework within which 
we implement the plan to refashion the library. This in-
cludes both articulating goals (library as a space where 
new knowledge is generated) and experimenting with 
tools that may help us achieve those goals (user tagging 
for online catalog items). By imagining an environment 
that encourages direct interaction, and then suggesting 
starting discussion topics, we employ conversation the-
ory (knowledge is created, and meanings agreed upon, 
in conversation) to refashion the library as a place that 
enables process as well as content. 
Definitions	 and	 classifications	 have	 historically	 been	
created	 by	 field	 experts,	 who	 generally	 work	 within	
disciplinary boundaries, using disciplinary methods. 
Collaborative knowledge-gathering technologies allow 
definitions	 and	 structures	 to	 emerge	 from	 the	 materi-
als themselves, potentially without regard to their prior 
classification(s).	 This	 emergent	 knowledge,	 created	
within programmatic space, informs the way in which 
reconceptualizing the virtual space will translate into 
transforming	the	library’s	physical	space.	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 300
Physical / Virtual Space 
We put practical considerations such as funding aside for 
the moment: before proposing a capital renovation proj-
ect to the university, we must have a clear idea of what 
we are trying to accomplish. 
Most	library	users	associate	the	library’s	physical	space	
with silent study. With clever layout planning — perhaps 
re-shuffling	stacks	to	de-emphasize	them	and	minimize	
sound movement — a library can accommodate multiple 
spaces for quiet group discussion in addition to carrels. 
Round tables are provided, with computers and large-
screen monitors for collaborative viewing and discus-
sion of online resources. The library becomes a constant 
low-grade workshop space that makes both physical and 
virtual materials equitably available. 
We are currently creating two topical online resources, 
which follow from our relatively new understanding 
of the library itself as a pedagogical tool. Our History 
of Missiology site [1] aims to present an extensive and 
unique collection of letters, journals, biographies, travel 
descriptions, and books written by and about protestant 
missionaries. These materials will be of use both to theo-
logians and to social scientists, as they constitute the ear-
liest anthropological records of several cultures. 
We are also gathering resources about the Personalism 
school	of	 thought,	which	flourished	at	BU	in	 the	early	
20th century. It has played an important role in the de-
velopment of philosophical theology, but its implications 
are far-reaching in their interdisciplinarity. Personalism 
has not been adequately studied, and connections be-
tween it and later philosophical thought have not been 
explicitly drawn. By providing primary materials and 
tools for discussion, we again hope to facilitate emergent 
knowledge. 
Collection Development and Cataloging 
Approaching collection development as a third-order ac-
tivity, we consider the number of books on shelves one, 
but not the sole, determining factor of the strength of 
a	collection.	Programmatic	restructuring	of	the	library’s	
physical and virtual spaces is aimed at gathering inter-
disciplinary groups, which in turn will ideally participate 
in collection development along with library staff. As 
knowledge can be built up, mapped, by free (informed) 
association, so library collections can be developed in a 
similar way. 
Thus, a series of meetings dedicated to the revival of 
Personalism may attract theologians, philosophers, his-
torians and sociologists. Each scholar will bring knowl-
edge of different relevant resources to the table, and in 
the course of discussion draw out a coherent and com-
prehensive body of knowledge that the community be-
lieves to be essential to its work. This is new in that we 
aim to gather people in the library, both as a physical 
space and as a concept within the larger structure of a 
research institution, in a purposeful and sustained way. 
Through this process we would create a more participa-
tory and connected relationship both between research-
ers across their disciplinary boundaries, and between the 
library and their respective research programs. 
In the past few decades, with the advent of electronic 
cataloging, libraries have been slowly moving towards 
the third order of order. For the most part libraries still 
catalog physical objects; it is only very recently that we 
have been able to begin digitizing those objects, and have 
had to face the existence of born-digital artifacts also in 
need	of	cataloging.	Momentum	is	difficult	to	influence:	
even with digital objects, libraries fall into patterns of 
cataloging typical of physical artifacts. Developing re-
ferral systems, social tagging, etc. will be required for an 
accurate representation of these complex and structur-
ally novel entities. 
Moving Forward: Assessment and 
Implementation 
In order for the project of refashioning the research pro-
cess to succeed, a crucial component is an outreach coor-
dinator	who	is	also	a	scholar	in	the	field.	This	would	be	
a person who rallies the researcher troops and continu-
ally spurs conversation. Without such a constant external 
stimulus, and with so many other demands on their time 
and attention, researchers are less likely to participate in 
– or initiate – discussion. 
This sort of rallying can and should be institutionalized. 
With a dedicated driving force behind them, brown-bag 
seminars, lecture/presentation series and discussion lists 
can be a thriving ground for exploring ideas. Such ef-
forts have so far been led by dedicated individuals (for 
example, Willard McCarty in his stewardship of the 
Humanist discussion list) and often at digital humani-
ties centers (the MITH Digital Dialogues, the Computers 
in the Humanities Users Group at Brown, the Seminar 
in Humanities Computing at the Centre for Computing 
in	the	Humanities	in	King’s	College	London,	and	many	
others). The library as an institution is well positioned 
to join in as a venue for scholarly communication, given 
adequate	staffing	and	support.	
How to actually accomplish all of these things? We will 
present the challenges we have faced thus far, and our 
approach to overcoming those challenges during the cur-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  301
rent academic year, by addressing several recommenda-
tions	from	the	final	report	of	the	ACLS	Commission	on	
Cyberinfrastructure, released in 2006. 
[1] http://digilib.bu.edu/mission/ 
