Library Collaboration with 
Large Digital Humanities 
Projects
William A. Kretzschmar, Jr. 
University of Georgia 
kretzsch@uga.edu
William G. Potter 
University of Georgia 
At	DH2007	a	special	session	on	“finishing”	large	hu-manities research projects (now forthcoming as a 
cluster in DHQ) suggested, in part, that particular stages 
of such projects might be completed, but that continu-
ing institutional support was important for the long-
term sustainability of the projects and their products. At 
DH2008 a special session was devoted to “Aspects of 
Sustainability in Digital Humanities,” in which techni-
cal, organizational, and scholarly dimensions were dis-
cussed with reference to a museum project, along with 
metadata and the issue of portability in other settings. 
In this paper, we would like to continue the theme of 
sustainability. We will discuss issues of institutional 
support for a large digital humanities project, and then 
propose collaboration with the university library as the 
only realistic option for long-term sustainability in our 
environment. We believe that our experience is typical 
of the situation for other projects, large and small, that 
many digital humanities faculty now face at their institu-
tions, and therefore that our experience is also typical of 
the demands that will be placed on libraries to sustain 
faculty digital research for the long-term.
As for many digital projects, the Linguistic Atlas Project 
(LAP) began with computing resources located within 
the	 research	 office	 itself,	 first	 personal	 computers	 and	
later servers. When the university created a research 
computing	 service	 (as	 an	 addition	 to	 the	 institution’s	
administrative and instructional services), LAP was one 
of	 the	 first	 clients--the	 editor	 of	 LAP	was	 even	 asked	
to help design the service. However, over the course 
of several years the funding structure for the research 
computing service changed from an essentially institu-
tional budget with additions from externally funded re-
search, to a fee-based service much more dependent on 
research with annual external funding. This meant that 
humanities projects like LAP, while not excluded from 
the	 research	 computing	 service,	 either	 needed	 to	 find	
consistent external funding or hope for sufferance from 
the paying customers.  Neither of these options appeared 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  187
likely to sustain LAP digital products and archives over 
the long term, and, citing budget pressures, the universi-
ty administration declined to guarantee funding for gaps 
in the external funding that LAP has regularly solicited 
and received. LAP reacquired a server for its research of-
fice	and	20	Tb	of	storage	space	for	its	large	and	growing	
multimedia archive.
Enter the University Librarian.  During discussions 
about institutional support for LAP, whose paper and 
audio tape records are stored in a library special collec-
tions facility, the University Librarian suggested that the 
library was expanding its multimedia collections (e.g., 
our institution hosts the Peabody awards, and so has an 
important interest in archiving TV materials), and even 
the large multimedia collections of LAP could be incor-
porated there. Unlike the research computing service, the 
mission of the library includes archiving and dissemina-
tion, now increasingly of digital materials as well as tra-
ditional paper. We are now developing cooperation not 
just for a multimedia archive, but also for dissemination 
of LAP products and information through library means 
in the context of continuing scholarly activity.
The terms of our cooperation can be discussed under just 
the headings of the DH2008 sustainability session: 
—Technology. Two issues dominate here, long-term 
storage and security. It had been planned that LAP ma-
terials would be stored on spinning disk in the research 
computing service storage array. However, the library 
holds its multimedia collections on LTO-4 tape.  The 
latter is much more cost effective; however, tape stor-
age requires periodic refresh of the medium (which the 
library	will	carry	out	indefinitely	as	part	of	its	archival	
mission), and limits the speed of access to the materials. 
LAP	and	the	library	intend	to	disseminate	the	project’s	
multimedia (audio, and later image) products, but the 
speed of online access is not required for all materials. 
We will discuss what can be disseminated online and by 
other means and the terms of such dissemination, as well 
as the balance between spinning disk and tape in a set-
ting like ours. 
Security is an issue for the online presence of LAP at the 
library.  The project has had a heavily interactive Web 
presence	including	GIS	for	over	a	decade,	first	on	servers	
in	 the	research	office	and	later	at	 the	research	comput-
ing service. However, the library has not provided inter-
active Web access of this kind before. We will discuss 
integration of LAP programming into the library server 
system, including reversal of the previous practice of 
heavy server-side scripting to place more emphasis on 
client-side processing.
—Organization. LAP and the library will use metadata 
standards developed for library and linguistic collec-
tions, but the question of standards is not trivial because 
metadata practices for libraries and linguists have not de-
veloped in parallel owing to different goals of the prac-
tices. We will discuss the resolution of these differences.
We will also discuss the organization of the partner-
ship of the library and the LAP. Just as for the research 
computing service, there are real costs associated with 
continuing services provided to LAP by the library. 
However, the difference in the mission of the research 
computing service as compared to the library makes a 
difference in how such costs might be borne over the 
long term. Periodic infusions of external funding can as-
sist the library to accomplish its goals, but the improved 
match with LAP as an archival and information resource 
makes it more reasonable to provide continuing support 
for the project without annual external funding. 
—Scholarship. LAP cannot just be given over to the 
library in its entirety because it remains very active in 
scholarly work. As long as LAP continues to conduct 
new research, it can cooperate with the library to keep 
its Web presence up to date  including both links and 
programming for interactivity.  The LAP archives can 
be extended with new material, but also with new ver-
sions of old materials (such as digital images of paper 
records). We will discuss how new work and additional 
aspects of older materials can continue to round out LAP 
collections in the library, as an active partnership instead 
of a static archive.
We believe that cooperation at our institution between 
the library and a large digital humanities project should 
not be a singular occurrence.  Some digital humanities 
projects have always been associated with and supported 
by the university library, and many libraries, including 
ours, have been active with their own digital initiatives. 
However, a great many more digital humanities projects 
began as separate faculty initiatives, and many libraries 
are now interested in developing their digital archives 
and activities. If independent projects are to be sustained 
beyond their initial development, they will require the 
sort of new partnership that we discuss. Libraries, too, 
can enhance their digital activities through cooperation 
with faculty digital humanities projects as information 
resources. We hope our partnership can provide a model.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 188
