Literature, “The Literary,” and 
the Dataworld
Stuart Moulthrop 
University of Baltimore 
smoulthrop@ubalt.edu 
This paper addresses a recurrent (perhaps constitu-tive) concern in electronic literature: as technical 
practices and affordances change, how should we dis-
tinguish between what is and is not literature?  Liberal-
minded critics like N. Katherine Hayles and Alan Liu 
have proposed a category called “the literary,” a kind of 
cosmic cloud orbiting the stellar core of traditional lit-
erature.  Some demur from this view, defending formal 
distinctions between literary and non-literary production 
(John Cayley), consonant with a neo-formalist move-
ment in art and design (Ellen Lupton).
I trace this tension to a central dynamic of interactive 
media: the shift from CONTENT to DATA, which arises 
from radical change in the technical substrate of writing, 
where computation replaces inscription.  Our technolo-
gies of writing and related sign-exchange no longer op-
erate by containment in static, material structures, but 
now	flow	as	impulses	through	processors	and	networks.	
The consequences of this shift are far from trivial or in-
cidental.  Containment yields to circulation, publishing 
and broadcasting to Web services.  Where CONTENT 
was,	we	now	find	DATA,	meaning	that which is given, 
always in multiple dimensions:
•	 given IN to a system of encoding;
•	 given OUT through a system of communication;
•	 given UP to processing and transformation;
•	 given BACK as riff, recursion, and feedback.
Until fairly recently, the full impact of this change has 
been elusive, even in purportedly forward-looking cir-
cles.  Generally speaking, electronic literature has en-
gaged my sense of data in only limited ways.  The early 
phase of electronic literature largely featured translation 
of lyric or narrative content-objects into data -- as in all 
my	work	 to	date.	 	True,	 constructs	 like	 interactive	fic-
tions or procedural poems convert words into digital in-
formation, and evoke a text according to logical process-
es; but with the crucial exception of MUDs and MOOs, 
first-generation	works	generally	do	not	involve	multiple	
participants, or allow the core code to change with use. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  207
Considering that constantly connected, high-speed digi-
tal networks have only been widely available for about a 
decade, these limits are not surprising.
With the arrival of such affordances around the turn 
of the century, digital culture has crossed a watershed. 
However much bemoaned by scholars, Wikipedia and its 
cousins have vastly increased the amount of not-entire-
ly-erroneous information ready to hand.  In the creative 
sphere, electronic writers and net artists have begun to 
exploit the content-data shift in more socially complex 
ways.  Work by Jim Carpenter, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, 
Mark Marino, Jason Nelson, Kate Armstrong, and oth-
ers has opened electronic poetry and prose to RSS feeds, 
Googlemaps, Twitter, FaceBook, and a range of other 
social information tools.  These experiments complicate 
demarcations between writing and performance.  Nota-
bly, they also generate the anxieties about literature and 
“the literary” that are the main subject of this paper.
As	a	long-time	member	of	electronic	literature’s	Golden	
Age team, my sympathies are divided.  I like the new 
voices and believe deeply in the direction of their art, but 
at the same time I respect those who are more skeptically 
inclined.  Like Cayley, I have my own investments in 
stable and salient expression, and would probably place 
certain limits on the social life of information.  Like Lup-
ton, I believe the explosion of creative energy enabled 
by emerging technologies should be shaped by sound 
understanding of formal principles.
So, as the sons of middle children will, I call for accom-
modation.  However much we deal in data, the idea of 
content seems ineradicable.  So in the rapidly evolving 
space of electronic media, literature and “the literary” 
must	find	ways	to	get	along.		While	the	sentiment	alone	
is not worth much, I also offer some practical sugges-
tions:
1. Anyone concerned about electronic literature (or in-
deed, digital culture more generally) must embrace 
green technology -- taking this adjective not in its 
popular, environmentalist sense, but in its other reg-
ister of novelty or neoteny.  Obedient to the Law of 
Mo(o)re, we should never expect our tools, or our 
scope of work, to attain the long-term stability of 
print culture, at least not in present generations.  We 
paint in the rain.
2. Accordingly, we need to shape an aesthetic that em-
braces both that which is remembered and resonant, 
and that which is evanescent or transient.  As Thom-
as	Pynchon’s	heretical	ex-Puritan	ancestor	argued,	
salvation is impossible unless some are passed over. 
Some child is always left behind.  From which it fol-
lows that oblivion or preterition is an inverse grace. 
The stars cannot shine without those clouds of dust.
3. We need better ways to transfer understanding and 
technique: occasions for radicals of the dataworld to 
earn recognition from those of us still consecrated to 
content.  Likewise, we could use forums in certain 
old hands interested in crossing the watershed might 
learn new approaches from those who have come 
after and gone ahead.
The Electronic Literature Organization and its interna-
tional peers have all taken important steps toward these 
goals, and I will end by looking at a few of these devel-
opments.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 208
