LORE: A Compound Object 
Authoring and Publishing Tool 
for Literary Scholars 
Anna Gerber 
The University of Queensland 
agerber@itee.uq.edu.au
Jane Hunter 
The University of Queensland  
jane@itee.uq.edu.au
This paper presents LORE (Literature Object Re-use and Exchange), a light-weight tool designed to en-
able scholars and teachers of literature to author, edit 
and publish OAI-ORE-compliant compound informa-
tion objects that encapsulate related digital resources and 
bibliographic records. LORE provides a graphical user 
interface for creating, labelling and visualizing typed re-
lationships between individual objects using terms from 
a bibliographic ontology based on the IFLA FRBR. Af-
ter creating a compound object, users can attach metada-
ta and publish it to a repository as an RDF graph, where 
it can be searched, retrieved, edited and re-used by oth-
ers. LORE has been developed in the context of the Aus-
tralian Literature Resource project (AustLit) and hence 
focuses on compound objects for teaching and research 
within the Australian literature studies community.
1.   Introduction and Objectives
Within the discipline of literature research and teach-
ing, the ability to relate disparate digital resources in a 
standardized, machine-readable format has the potential 
to	add	significant	value	to	distributed	collections	of	lit-
erary resources. Such compound objects can be used to 
track the lineage of derivative works which are based 
on a common concept, to relate objects around a com-
mon theme, or to encapsulate related digital resources 
for teaching purposes. For example, one might want to 
relate the original edition of Follow the Rabbit-Proof 
Fence to the illustrated edition, a radio recording and 
a	digital	version	of	the	film	–	and	to	retrieve	and	pres-
ent these resources, with their relationships visualized, 
regardless of their location. Our objective is to provide 
a software tool to enable such encapsulation and subse-
quent re-use and visualization, by building on the efforts 
of two previous digital library initiatives:
•	 The IFLA Functional Requirements for Biblio-
graphic Records (IFLA, 1998)
Yan, S. et al. (2007). Toward Alternative Measures for 
Ranking Venues: A Case of Database Research Commu-
nity, Proceedings of the 7th ACM/IEEE-CS joint confer-
ence on Digital libraries, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2007. 
Yang, K. et al. (2007). CiteSearch: Next-generation Ci-
tation Analysis, Proceedings of the 7th ACM/IEEE-CS 
joint conference on Digital libraries, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada, 2007. 
ZOTERO. Available at: http://www.zotero.org/ (Ac-
cessed October 2008). 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  125
•	 The OAI-Object Reuse and Exchange (OAI, 2008)
FRBR is a recommendation of the International Federa-
tion of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) to 
restructure	catalogue	databases	to	reflect	the	conceptual	
structure of information resources. It uses an entity-rela-
tionship model of metadata for bibliographic resources 
that supports four levels of representation: work, ex-
pression, manifestation and item. It also supports three 
groups of entities: products of intellectual or artistic 
endeavour (publications); entities responsible for intel-
lectual or artistic content (a person or organisation); and 
entities that serve as subjects of intellectual or artistic 
endeavour (concept, object, event, and place).
The Open Archives Initiative Object Reuse and Ex-
change (OAI-ORE) is an international collaborative 
initiative, focusing on a framework for the exchange of 
information about Digital Objects between cooperating 
repositories, registries and services. OAI-ORE aims to 
support the creation, management and dissemination of 
the new forms of composite digital resources being pro-
duced by eResearch and to make the information within 
these objects discoverable, machine-readable, interop-
erable and reusable. Named Graphs (Jeremy, 2005) are 
endorsed by the OAI-ORE initiative as a means of pub-
lishing compound digital objects that clearly states their 
logical boundaries (Lagoze et al, 2007). They do this in 
a way that is discipline-independent, but that also pro-
vides hooks to include rich semantics, metadata, ontolo-
gies and rules. Our hypothesis is that OAI-ORE Named 
Graphs provide the ideal mechanism for representing 
literary compound objects that encapsulate the entities 
and relationships expressed by the IFLA FRBR. 
To test this hypothesis, we are working with the Austra-
lian literature studies community through AustLit. Aus-
tLit	 is	 a	 non-profit	 collaboration	 between	 the	National	
Library of Australia and twelve Universities. It provides 
the peak resource of bibliographic data for scholars un-
dertaking research into Australian literary heritage and 
print culture history. The AustLit data model is also 
based on the IFLA FRBR (Kilner, 2005), making it ideal 
for evaluating LORE. Hence our core aims are to pro-
vide easy-to-use tools that can be seamlessly integrated 
within existing research practices through the AustLit 
Web Portal and that enable:
•	 the publishing of compound objects in open access 
repositories so they can be readily shared and re-
used;
•	 the easy discovery and re-use of these compound 
objects through the attachment of simple metadata;
•	 the visualization of complex relationships between 
literary resources (including the lineage of derived 
intellectual products) through intuitive graphical 
user interfaces.
2.   Related Work
A number of previous efforts have applied OAI-ORE to 
specific	scientific	disciplines	to	encapsulate	experimen-
tal data and results. These include: FORSITE (2008), 
eChemistry (Van Noorden, 2008), UIUC (Cole, 2008) 
and SCOPE (Cheung et al, 2007). Although CULTOS 
(2003) uses RDF to represent multimedia and hypertext 
presentations for e-Humanities applications, it does not 
combine OAI-ORE and IFLA-FRBR to capture or label 
the precise relationships between entities. Also relevant 
is an overview of previous implementations and applica-
tions of IFLA FRBR, provided by Babeu (2008). A sig-
nificant	 past	 focus	 of	 e-Humanities	 tools	 development	
has been on scholarly mark-up and annotation tools to 
attach interpretations to individual objects or parts of 
objects (e.g., paragraphs within an article). LORE takes 
the annotation paradigm a step further, enabling authors 
to annotate links between multiple resources with tags 
from an ontology. 
3.   Implementation and User Interface
LORE is implemented as a Mozilla Firefox extension 
using AJAX. The LORE tool stores and queries Named 
Graphs representing compound objects via web services 
on a Sesame 2 or Fedora repository. The types for intra-
aggregation relationships as well as metadata terms for 
aggregated	objects	are	specified	via	an	OWL	ontology,	
which	is	configured	at	start-up.	Through	examining	all	of	
the topic types and relationships from the AustLit data-
base, we developed an OWL ontology which is based on 
IFLA FRBR, but extended to support additional relation-
ships (e.g., between people). 
Fig. 1. Compound object editing interface
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 126
er this approach does not handle URIs identifying non-
information resources well, and issues arise with non-
persistent URLs and with identifying objects that exist 
within	institutional	repositories	using	local	identifiers.
Because	 the	 IFLA	 FRBR	 is	 complex,	 it	may	 be	 diffi-
cult for a literary scholar to apply appropriate metadata 
terms and relationship types from the ontology to relate 
resources.  Strategies for addressing this issue could in-
clude adding more semantic checks to the UI to assist 
users in applying the ontology terms, or tailoring the 
domain ontologies based on community needs and un-
derstanding.
The on-going development and evaluation of LORE in 
the context of AustLit will provide an essential com-
ponent of the cyber-infrastructure requirements of the 
Australian literary studies community, as well as literary 
scholars globally.
Acknowledgements
Aus-e-Lit is funded by DEST through the National eRe-
search Architecture Taskforce (NeAT), part of the Na-
tional Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy 
(NCRIS).
References
AustLit. (2008). AustLit: The Australian Literature Re-
source. http://austlit.edu.au (accessed 11 November 
2008).
Babeu, A. (2008). Building a “FRBR-Inspired” Catalog: 
The Perseus Digital Library Experience. http://www.
perseus.tufts.edu/~ababeu/PerseusFRBRExperiment.
pdf (accessed 11 November 2008).
Cheung, K., Hunter, J., Lashtabeg, A., Drennan, J. 
(2007).	 SCOPE	 -	A	 Scientific	Compound	Object	 Pub-
lishing and Editing System, 3rd International Digital 
Curation Conference, Washington DC.
Cole, T.W. (2008). OAI-ORE experiments at the Uni-
versity of Illinois Library at Urbana-Champaign. http://
www.openarchives.org/ore/meetings/Soton/Cole-OAI-
ORE-Roll-Out-OR08.pdf (accessed 11 November 2008).
CULTOS. (2003). http://www.cultos.org/ (accessed 11 
November 2008).
DC. (2008). Dublin Core Metadata Element Set, Version 
1.1. http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/ (accessed 11 
November 2008).
LORE’s	 editing	 interface	 displays	 OAI-ORE	 resource	
maps in a graphical form, as shown in Figure 1, as well 
as RDF/XML. In the graphical view, nodes represent 
the resources aggregated within the resource map and 
arcs represent typed relationships between them. Each 
graphical node contains an interactive preview of the 
resource that it represents, which can be collapsed to 
conserve screen space or resized to display more content. 
This allows users to view and interact with aggregated 
resources directly from within LORE rather than having 
to load them individually in the browser. Clicking on a 
node’s	 identifier	 loads	 the	 resource	 in	 the	 top	 browser	
window.
Metadata about the OAI-ORE resource map, aggregation, 
and aggregated resources is displayed and can be added 
to or edited via the Properties panel on the bottom right-
hand-side.	The	metadata	terms	that	may	be	specified	are	
those from OAI-ORE, Dublin Core (DC, 2008), DCMI 
Metadata Terms (DCMI, 2008), selected terms from 
FOAF (FOAF, 2007), and, datatype properties from the 
domain ontology. Relationship types are indicated by 
labels on the arcs, and can be changed by editing the 
properties or by selecting from the arc context menu, 
which is populated by the object properties from the 
domain ontology.
New resources to be added to the resource map are 
discovered via the main browser window. Clicking 
on the OAI-ORE logo in the status bar toggles the 
editor’s	visibility,	 so	 that	 the	 full	window	can	be	used	
for resource discovery, whilst the resource map being 
constructed remains accessible throughout the browsing 
session. A resource loaded in the browser can be added 
to	 the	 resource	 map	 via	 context	 menus	 or	 LORE’s	
toolbar. The toolbar provides options for saving and 
loading compound objects stored in the RDF repository 
specified	in	the	user	preferences.	Resource	maps	can	also	
be discovered and loaded via the Browse/Search panel.
4.  Discussion and Conclusions
The AustLit researchers with whom we have been col-
laborating have been overwhelmingly enthusiastic about 
this work. They particularly liked the interactive node 
previews, the direct integration of the editor with the 
browser and the ease with which they could customize 
the relationship types and metadata supported by the 
editor. They would like to see additional arc visualiza-
tions such as line decorators, arrows and colours or line 
styles to distinguish relationships, as well as support for 
bi-directional relationships.
Objects can be added to a compound object in the LORE 
editor if they can be loaded in the web browser. Howev-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  127
DCMI. (2008). DCMI Metadata Terms. http://dublin-
core.org/documents/dcmi-terms/ (accessed 11 Novem-
ber 2008).
FOAF.	 (2007).	 FOAF	 Vocabulary	 Specification	 0.91.	
http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/ (accessed 11 November 
2008).
FORSITE. (2008). http://foresite.cheshire3.org/ (ac-
cessed 11 November 2008).
IFLA. (1998). Functional requirements for bibliographic 
records	 (FRBR):	 Final	 report.	 http://www.ifla.org/VII/
s13/frbr/frbr.pdf (accessed 11 November 2008).
Jeremy, J.C., et al. (2005). Named graphs, provenance 
and trust, 14th international conference on World Wide 
Web. ACM Press, Chiba, Japan
Kilner, K. (2005). The AustLit Gateway and Scholarly 
Bibliography: A Specialist Implementation of the FRBR. 
Cataloguing and Classification Quarterly. 39:3/4.
Lagoze, C., Van de Sompel, H. (2007). Compound In-
formation Objects: The OAIORE Perspective.  http://
www.openarchives.org/ore/documents/CompoundOb-
jects-200705.html (accessed 11 November 2008).
OAI. (2008). Open Archives Initiative - Object Reuse 
and Exchange. http://www.openarchives.org/ore/ (ac-
cessed 11 November 2008).
Van Noorden, R. (2008). Microsoft Ventures into Open 
Access Chemistry. Chemistry World. http://www.rsc.
org/chemistryworld/News/2008/January/29010803.asp 
(accessed 11 November 2008).
