Manuscript Annotations in 
Space and Time
Erica Fretwell
Duke University 
enf3@duke.edu 
Reading a book or manuscript involves four dimen-sions:	width,	length,	depth	and	time,	since	flipping	
the page is a temporal act, with a before and an after.  As 
scholars and publishers increasingly move towards digi-
tal remediation of literary archives, how do we digitally 
render 4D objects in a medium that is missing at least the 
third one, and text encoding standards that deprecate the 
role	of	the	page	in	shaping	meaning?		Walt	Whitman’s	
annotations written on nineteenth-century books, maga-
zines and newspapers, provide a special opportunity to 
begin to explore this question.  A particularly unusual 
class of documents that Whitman created has posed dif-
ficulties	for	electronic	rendering.		At	The	Walt	Whitman	
Archive, where I am a project manager, we call them 
“flipbooks,”	 to	 denote	 a	 text	 that,	 while	 supported	 on	
a single sheet is, in essence, a scrapbook with multiple 
leaves	glued	on	top	of	each	other.		That	is,	“flipbooks”	
are documents that are annotated and then layered on top 
of	each	other	so	that	one	can	flip	each	clipping	or	page	
over:
In this presentation I will discuss how the questions of 
the third and fourth dimensions of these documents in-
formed our design of interfaces for encoding, searching, 
and browsing digital surrogates of them.
With the help of an NEH grant in the Digital Humanities, 
the Whitman Archive created an interface that attempts 
to maximize audience and utility while addressing theo-
retical issues in the representation of layered documents. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 118
We have created a set of software technologies and en-
coding practices that allow for the tagging, displaying, 
and searching of static documents that mix print, manu-
script, and visual images—documents such as printed 
texts or images bearing handwritten annotations.  These 
technologies include a suggested approach for encod-
ing coordinates in XML transcriptions so that search 
engines can visually display results of user searches for 
manuscript words and phrases; web-based software for 
linking XML editing programs to an image display to 
allow encoders to relate bitmap images to XML text; and 
model stylesheets capable of displaying transcriptions 
of annotated documents together with digital images of 
those	documents.		We	have	kept	Peter	Robinson’s	warn-
ings about the tendency of previous markup interfaces 
to	 be	 difficult	 to	 use—based	 on	 his	 experiences	 with	
his own software, Collate—in mind.  For example, the 
ARCHway Project features a suite of powerful tools for 
relating texts to images and for capturing multiple hi-
erarchies.  Our software suite, following on the exam-
ple of the ARCHway Project, is designed to be simple 
enough to be used by transcribers with little familiarity 
with information encoding and portable enough to work 
in multiple computing environments for widely different 
kinds of archival projects.  Unlike ARCHway, however, 
it is web-based, and allows encoders to mark space as a 
structural entity.
Creating these interfaces has raised important ques-
tions.  What exactly constitutes marginalia, and how 
would one render it digitally?  To what extent are writ-
ing and reading, both in digital and non-digital media, 
spatial	acts?	 	Whitman’s	marginalia	reveals	his	 literary	
influences,	how	he	is	bound	in	time	to	writers	that	pre-
cede	him;	but	the	spatial	element	is	significant	as	well,	
since his texts take root in the fertile marginal medium of 
theirs.  His practice of pasting such documents together 
into	 unforeseen	 and	 reconfigurable	 combinations,	with	
deliberately motile hierarchies, brings to mind Hayden 
White’s	argument	that	form	not	only	reveals	content,	but	
can	be	content	itself.		It	also	reconfigures,	as	the	work	of	
Marta Werner on the “radical scatter[er]” Emily Dickin-
son suggests, what it means for scholars today to theo-
rize peripheries.  Hence, the theoretical orientations and 
practical	 implications	of	 the	archive’s	 interface	are	not	
bound	specifically	to	Whitman,	but	apply	across	literary	
studies and digital humanities.  In creating a relationship 
between encoding practices and interactive design for 
search and browsing, we have followed a path suggested 
by, among others, Johanna Drucker, who asks if, “rather 
than think[ing] about simulating the way a book looks, 
we might consider extending the ways a book works as 
we shift into digital instruments.”
Building an interface to allow for visualized search re-
turns of manuscript words in images meant creating a 
coordinate system for manuscript tagging that allows 
for searches or deformations based on the location of a 
word	in	relative	space,	not	just	for	specific	terms	or	enti-
ties.  But building one that makes possible an approach 
to	how	Whitman’s	flipbooks	work,	 in	Drucker’s	 terms,	
also meant making alterations to the TEI P5 approach 
to	XML-based	markup,	and	in	particular,	to	TEI’s	insis-
tence that pages do not constitute intellectual structures. 
This	presentation	will	briefly	demonstrate	our	interface	
and discuss the logic of its design, focusing on the theo-
retical implications and practical potential of an approach 
that emphasizes layered spatial relations of text and im-
ages.  I will discuss the logic of the “surface and zone” 
markup recommended for indicating such relations, and 
discuss	why	we	found	it	unsuited	to	handling	Whitman’s	
annotated	flipbooks.	 	Briefly,	 I	will	 outline	 our	 practi-
cal response, using a coordinate-tagging system, to such 
markup, which allows page space to function as an in-
tellectual structure.  To experiment with recreating the 
way	 temporal	 flexibility	 affects	 intellectual	 hierarchies	
in these documents, I will argue, not only introduces a 
new kind of activity, a new domain of interpretation, into 
editorial work, but also posits this kind of work as funda-
mentally multidimensional.
Bibliography
Bradley, Matthew.  “GladCAT: An online catalogue of 
the books and reading of William Ewart Gladstone at St 
Deiniol’s	Library.”		St.	Deiniols	Library	Web	Site,	Janu-
ary 2009.  Accessed 1 Mar 2009.  <http://www.st-deini-
ols.com/cms/goto.asp?id=142>
Dekhtyar, Alex, and Ionut Emil Iacob, “A Framework 
for Management of Concurrent XML Markup.” Data and 
Knowledge Engineering 52.2 (2005): 185–215.
Drucker, Johanna.  “The Virtual Codex from Page Space 
to E-space.” Companion to Digital Humanities.  Eds. 
Ray Siemens, John Unsworth, and Susan Schreibman. 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 2004. 198-217.  <http://www.
digitalhumanities.org/companion/>
Kiernan, Kevin, et al.  “The ARCHway Project: Ar-
chitecture for Research in Computing for Humanities 
through Research, Teaching, and Learning.” Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 20, Suppl 1 (2005): 69-88.
McGann, Jerome.  “Marking Texts of Many Dimen-
sions.”  Companion to Digital Humanities.  Eds. Ray 
Siemens, John Unsworth, and Susan Schreibman.  Ox-
ford, UK: Blackwell, 2004. 198-217.  <http://www.digi-
talhumanities.org/companion/>
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  119
Paul Dyck and Stuart Williams, “Toward an Electronic 
Edition of an Early Modern Assembled Book,” Comput-
ing in the Humanities Working Papers A.44, (July 2008).
Robinson, Peter.  “Current issues in making digital edi-
tions of medieval texts—or, do electronic scholarly edi-
tions have a future.”  Digital Medievalist 1.1 (Spring 
2005).  <http://www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/1.1/
robinson/>
Text Encoding Initiative.  P5: Guidelines for Electronic 
Text Encoding and Interchange.  2007.  <http://www.tei-
c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/>
Werner, Marta L., ed.  Emily	Dickinson’s	Open	Folios:	
Scenes of Reading, Surfaces of Writing. Ann Arbor: U of 
Michigan P, 1995.
_____, ed.  Radical	 Scatters:	Emily	Dickinson’s	 Frag-
ments and Related Texts, 1870-1886.  Ann Arbor: U of 
Michigan P, 1999.  <http://www.hti.umich.edu/d/dickin-
son/ >
Witt,	Andreas,	et	al.	 	“Unification	of	XML	Documents	
with Concurrent Markup.” Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting 2005 20.1: 103-116.
