MAPS: Manuscript map 
Annotation and Presentation 
System 
Linking formal ontologies with social 
tagging to (re-)construct relationships 
between manuscript maps and contextual 
documents
Charles van den Heuvel 
Virtual Knowledge Studio for Humanities and 
Social Sciences 
charles.vandenheuvel@vks.knaw.nl
Introduction
The proposed paper describes a pilot entitled MAPS of the Virtual Knowledge Studio for the Humani-
ties and Social Sciences (VKS) of the Royal Netherlands 
Academy of Arts and Sciences (KNAW), the Dutch 
National Archives, Leiden University Library and the 
Department of Information and Computing Sciences of 
Utrecht University intended to disclose manuscript map 
collections in the Netherlands and potentially abroad 
for individual and institutional research in the humani-
ties. The research is embedded in the Spatial/GIS lab 
of a digital humanities collaboration of institutes of the 
Royal Academy, the so-called “Alfa-Lab” that started in 
March 2009. 
It builds upon research and existing “draw over image” 
software, developed within the context of the Paper and 
Virtual Cities project, a collaboration between the Uni-
versity Groningen and the Virtual Knowledge Studio. 
MAPS provides a system in which users reconstruct his-
torical contexts by means of annotations and  bottom-up 
geo-references, here called “spatial tags” complementary 
to the formal ontology based Encoded Archival Descrip-
tion standard. In a technological sense this implies the 
interoperability between (semi-)structured and “fuzzy” 
annotations in the form of tagged draw-over-images and 
the (semi-)automatic linking of maps with contextual 
documents. Besides technical issues, methodological 
questions are discussed regarding the role and authority 
of annotations and tags of professional and non-profes-
sional humanities researchers in a Web 2.0 environment. 
The requirements for use of manuscript maps in humani-
ties research are mapped by means of observational user 
studies of annotation practices and by testing interfaces. 
Manuscript Maps
After the Fall of Antwerp (1585), Amsterdam, with fa-
mous map printers/ publishers such as Blaeu, became in 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  139
the 17th Century a leading cartographical center in the 
world.  Research of this predominant position in com-
mercial cartography is relevant for historians of cartog-
raphy, for historians of the book and publishing and for 
cultural studies, such as art history. However, this em-
phasis on printed commercial cartography also blurs the 
importance of manuscript maps for research in a much 
wider	field	 of	 individual	 historians	 or	 of	 cultural	 heri-
tage, planning and policy institutions that use historical 
maps for technical or administrative purposes. Manu-
script	maps	 are	 significant	 not	 only	 for	 their	 quantity,	
the Dutch National Archives alone count approximately 
300.000 manuscript maps (including drawings) from 
Dutch administrative bodies, but also for their quality 
as unique historical sources. (De Vries 1989, Zandvliet 
1998, Heuvel 2003 and 2004).  Unfortunately, manu-
script maps are less accessible; their proper meaning can 
only be understood when they are re-linked to the docu-
ments they originally were intended to illustrate.  Due 
to 19th and 20th century archival processes many maps 
lost their contexts when they were separated from the 
documents to which they belonged.  Encoded Archival 
Description (EAD) and its extension Encoded Archi-
val Context  (EAC), used as standards in many Dutch 
archives, libraries and museums (including the Dutch 
National Archives), are powerful description and con-
textualization formats to encode links between maps and 
documents dispersed over cultural heritage institutions. 
Although	the	first	experiments	(coordinated	by	the	Dutch	
National Archives for the Netherlands and with Leiden 
University Library as participant) with such formats are 
promising and will be fully exploited, this linking pro-
cess to reconstruct original contexts and to create new 
ones is time-consuming and cannot be done by cultural 
heritage institutions on their own. A more productive 
way is to involve so many users as possible in the (re)
establishment of these historical relationships by enrich-
ing these manuscript maps with annotations, and to link 
these to archival documents as described in inventories. 
Annotation
In order to identify maps and to use them for histori-
cal research, it is important to link them to geographi-
cal space. Geo-referencing allows combinations and 
overlays of maps with minimum distortion.  However, 
this	 process	 is	 quite	 difficult	 for	manuscript	maps	 that	
vary so much in scale, precision, color etc. Instead of 
complex geo-referencing systems we opt for existing 
draw-over-image software, developed within the con-
text of the Paper and Virtual Cities project, a collabora-
tion between the University Groningen and the Virtual 
Knowledge Studio that allows us to select any object on 
the map for annotation in XML. (Heuvel & Koster 2007, 
Benavides& Heuvel 2008),  On the one hand the map 
annotator module will be used by individual experts in a 
conventional way to add knowledge through structured 
annotations based on professional research. Leiden Uni-
versity Library is a research library, whose special col-
lections are used for the greater part by scholars. On the 
other hand much more fuzzy and fragmented knowledge 
is available from users, who work more incidentally with 
maps, e.g. genealogists, local historians and private col-
lectors. Their input through Web 2.0-techniques may be 
of great help to reconstitute the lost context of historical 
maps. They provide the required critical mass; 85% of 
the visitors to the Dutch National Archives are genealo-
gists. However, we have to learn from Web 2.0 failures 
(Crotty 2008) and avoid mismatches between tools and 
the researchers that use them. Therefore analysis of an-
notation practices and usability testing of interfaces with 
focus groups of researchers in the humanities makes part 
of the project.  The methods used by E. Heere (2008) for 
analyzing the use of a historical GIS interface, will be 
extended to the analysis of practices of annotating/tag-
ging by researchers in a Web 2.0 environment. Another 
issue that will be addressed is the authority of annota-
tions by expert and lay-experts. Hereto we try to build on 
existing software (such and GENTECH and HarvANA) 
that allow expressing and visualizing the provenance and 
levels of authority of certain assertions. (Hunter 2008)
Presentation
Users have an easy access to the archive inventories 
described in EAD in order to search and annotate digi-
tized manuscript maps and related sources. Annotations 
of	geographical	space	and	time	are	described	in	specific	
XML vocabularies, such as Geographical Markup Lan-
guage and Historical Event Markup Language. After 
linking these clusters of knowledge have to be made 
available to researchers according to their needs. This is 
done in mash-ups maps (Google Maps, using the  KML 
standard). Because map annotation will be an ongoing 
process, the user interface should be integrated in a co-
herent system offering not only reference lists (tag lists, 
gazetteer and archive inventories), but also the already 
tagged documents.
System
MAPS enhances the research infrastructure by build-
ing an annotation infrastructure for user generated re-
search content in the humanities, by geo-semantic data 
integration (in this case maps, annotations and archival 
data), and by the presentation in suitable user-interfaces 
for researchers in the form of mash-ups. (Ennals 2007) 
The geo-semantic data integration between maps, anno-
tations and archival data will be based on (semi-) au-
tomatic linking, using multi-agent technology, between 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 140
profiles	 of	 (historical)	 archive	 creators,	 typologies	 of	
maps	 and	profiles	 of	 individual	 experts	 and	 lay	 expert	
researchers and research groups and cultural heritage, 
planning and policy institutions that use historical maps 
for technical or administrative purposes.
Scenario
Scheme of links between user and cultural heritage 
institutions in Manuscript Map Annotation and 
Presentation System - MAPS
The Dutch researcher Peter Sigmond studies Dutch 
habours between 1500-1800 for his PhD research. In 
chapter of his dissertation with the title Nederlandse 
Zeehavens tussen 1500-1800 he discusses a report and 
some designs of an engineer Alberdingh of 1688 for the 
creation of dock harbors in several Dutch harbors as 
alternative to the marine one in Amsterdam that gradu-
ally silted up and was not accessible anymore for heavy 
warships. Sigmond ordered a photograph of a part of a 
manuscript map number 4 of one of these designs for 
the town of Willemstad in the collection of Leiden Uni-
versity Library (LU). In our scenario this library points 
him to the draw-over-image tools [1] that allows him to 
indicate the exact contours of the object on the digital 
map in its image repository, that he wants to use for his 
illustration. He sends this image with the tag dock to 
LU [2]. His PhD also contains a reference to a report 
in the Dutch National Archives (NA) that describes the 
pro and cons of the various harbor cities for which the 
designs were made. He tags this information to the draw-
over-image (DOI) and sends it to LU [3]. DOI and tag 
are linked to the metadata description of the map 4 in 
EAD	that	has	already	a	link	to	three	others	files	describ-
ing maps belonging to the same project [4].  Numbering 
of the maps also make clear that there are some miss-
ing maps. Since the report refers to the Dutch National 
Archives a link is made to sources described with EAD 
metadata of this archive, including the DOI and tags [5] 
and reconnected with the maps of LU [6].  In a query on 
expected	archive	creator	profile,	in	this	case	military,	the	
database shows that there is another design of the same 
year for the same project map 5 and another later copy of 
it. The image of LU and the metadata of all their relevant 
images are combined with those of NA[7]  and send with 
the photographical order to the user [8]. With this infor-
mation the series of designs in Leiden University Library 
is completed with one extra drawing from the NA. The 
PhD researcher found out that there were extra drawings. 
Finally the National Archive found that there were more 
drawings belonging to the report in their collection. 
References
Benavides J. and Heuvel, C. van den (2008). The func-
tion and accuracy of old Dutch urban designs and maps. 
A computer assisted analysis of the extension of Leiden 
(1611) in Digital Humanities 2008 Conference, Univer-
sity of Oulu, Finland June 24-29, 55-56.  
Crotty, D. (2008). Why Web 2.0 is failing in biology. 
Harbor Protocols Cold Spring http://www.cshblogs.
org/cshprotocols/2008/02/14/why-web-20-is-failing-in-
biology/
EAD/EAC. http://www.iath.virginia.edu/eac.
ECAI.  http://www.ecai.org/ 
Ennals, R. and Gay, D. (2007). User-friendly functional 
programming for web mashups. In Proceedings of the 
2007 ACM SIGPLAN international Conference on Func-
tional Programming (Freiburg, Germany, October 01 - 
03, 2007). ICFP ‘07. ACM, New York, NY, 223-234.
GENTECH: http://www.ngsgenealogy.org/ngsgentech/
projects/Gdm/Gdm.cfm.
Heere, E.  (2008). GIS voor historisch landschapson-
derzoek: opzet en gebruik van een historisch GIS voor 
prekadastrale kaarten, PhD  thesis Utrecht University 27 
June 2008.  
Heuvel, C. van den  (2003) “Atlasticity”, Problems in 
defining	and	the	digitizing	military	manuscript	atlases	of	
the	Low	Countries.	In	[ed.	I.	Warmoes,	E.	d’Orgeix,	C.	
van den Heuvel]  Atlas Militaires Manuscrits Européens 
(XVIe-XVIIIe siècles). Forme, contenu, contexte de ré-
alisation et vocations,	Actes	des	4es	journées	d’	étude	du	
Musée des Plans-reliefs, Paris (18-19 April 2002) Paris 
pp. 11-26.
Heuvel, C. van den (2004).  Mapping Mixed Maps. His-
torical and future constructions of time and space in ur-
ban cartography. In Le temps 129e congrès des sociétés 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  141
historiques et scientifiques, Colloque IV Le temps des 
cartes. Monde des cartes, Bulletin du Comité français de 
cartographie [Numéro special],pp. 23-40.
Heuvel, C. van den, Koster E. (2007). Tussen papieren 
en digitale kaarten. De annotatie van een atlas en bijbe-
horende kaarten van Woerden. In Aangeraakt. Boeken in 
contact met hun lezers. Een bundel opstellen voor Wim 
Gerritsen en Paul Hoftijzer, red. Kasper van Ommen, 
Arnoud Vrolijk, Geert Warnar, Kleine publicaties van de 
Leidse Universiteitsbibliotheek Nr. 75, pp. 150-156.
Hunter, J., Khan, I., and Gerber, A. (2008)  HarvANA 
-Harvesting Community Tags to Enrich Collection 
Metadata. In ACM IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Li-
braries, JCDL June 16 - 20, 2008. Pittsburgh.
Vries, D. de [ ed.] (1989). Kaarten met geschiedenis 
1550-1800. Een selectie van oude getekende kaarten 
van Nederland uit de Collectie Bodel Nijenhuis HES, 
Utrecht  
Zandvliet, K. (1998). Mapping for Money. Maps, plans 
and topographic paintings and their role in Dutch over-
seas expansion during the 16th and 17th centuries, Bata-
vian Lion international, Amsterdam. 
