Medieval Scribes in Parts of 
Speech 
Comparing the vocabulary of different 
copies of the same text
Karina van Dalen-Oskam 
Huygens Instituut KNAW 
karina.van.dalen@huygensinstituut.knaw.nl
 
Introduction
Van Dalen-Oskam and van Zundert (2007) applied the	 lexical	 richness	 measures	 Yule’s	 K	 and	 Bur-
rows’s	Delta	 in	 an	 authorship	 attribution	 study	 on	 the	
Middle Dutch Romance of Walewein, which we know 
was written by two authors. The researchers used a 
walking	window	 to	find	where	 the	 second	author	 took	
over	from	the	first	author.	The	change	of	authors	could	
be seen in the graphs for Delta for three strata of high-
frequency words (1-50, 51-100, 101-150); it showed the 
best in frequency stratum 101-150. In the highest fre-
quency stratum, however, the break between the two 
scribes responsible for the manuscript of the text (this 
break occurred much earlier in the text than the author 
break) was even clearer. 
Following up on this research, the researchers looked 
into the distribution of parts of speech in the above-
mentioned frequency strata (van Dalen-Oskam & van 
Zundert 2008). When they examined the strata, starting 
with the highest frequency words (1-50) and going on 
to frequency stratum 101-150, they found an increasing 
percentage	 for	 the	 categories	 ‘noun’	 and	 ‘verb’,	 and	 a	
decreasing	 percentage	 for	 ‘pronoun’	 and	 ‘preposition’.	
This may imply that in the area in which this text showed 
the clearest difference between scribes (i.e. frequencies 
1-50), part of the uniqueness of these scribes lies in their 
idiosyncratic use (as to frequencies) of pronouns and 
prepositions. In the area in which Walewein showed the 
clearest difference between authors (frequencies 101-
150), part of the uniqueness of the authors lies in their 
idiosyncratic frequencies of nouns and verbs. In other 
words: the scribes seem to differ especially in the fre-
quencies of function words, whereas the authors seem 
to differ especially in the frequencies of content words.
Research questions
Authorship attribution for medieval texts before the age 
of printing is hampered by several practical problems. 
First,	we	 often	 do	 not	 know	 a	 text’s	 author.	However,	
even when the author is known, almost always his or 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  291
her original text has not come down to us. All that re-
main are copies of the text, or copies of copies of copies, 
which	are	usually	difficult	 to	position	 in	 a	 trustworthy	
family tree (stemma) of the manuscripts. Thus, we do 
not have the text of the original author, but only texts 
resulting from manual copying by scribes – persons who 
made a copy of a text for their own use or for the use of 
others (who may or may not have paid for these cop-
ies and perhaps had special wishes for their copies). We 
know that scribes made mistakes, and that they changed 
spellings and wording according to what they thought 
fit	for	their	audience.	And	we	know	that	they	sometimes	
reworked the text or parts thereof. In most cases, how-
ever, the original text is clearly recognizable. But when a 
text shows very many changes, scholars start describing 
these copies as adaptations, and consider them a new text 
rather than a copy, and see the scribe not as a copyist but 
as an author in his or her own right. Thus, the question 
is: how many changes are needed to call a text not a copy 
but	a	new	text?	All	 in	all,	 the	extent	of	 the	influence	a	
scribe had on the text he or she copied has been insuf-
ficiently	studied.
The Walewein results led to new research questions. 
The	first	was	whether	we	could	confirm	the	findings	in	a	
larger set of texts. If scribes do indeed differ as regards 
how frequently they use certain parts of speech, from the 
attribution point of view we could ask whether it may be 
possible to distinguish scribes from each other. From a 
literary and philological point of view, we may expect a 
clearer answer to the question in what ways scribes dif-
fered from authors (if they did differ, that is). And from 
a methodological standpoint, we would want to know 
which measures yield the best results.
Corpus and method
Not many Middle Dutch texts are available in a substan-
tial number of copies. We chose a work by the Flem-
ish author Jacob van Maerlant: the Rijmbijbel (‘Rhym-
ing	 Bible’),	 which	 is	 a	 translation/adaptation	 of	 the	
Medieval Latin Historia scholastica written by Petrus 
Comestor.	Van	Maerlant	finished	this	work	in	1271,	and	
many	fragments	and	fifteen	manuscripts	(though	not	all	
containing all parts of the text) are handed down to us, 
dating	from	ca.	1285	to	the	end	of	the	fifteenth	century.	
One of these manuscripts is available in a good edition; 
it is also digitally available lemmatized and tagged for 
parts of speech. Transcriptions of the other manuscripts 
had to be made for this research. Because of the length 
of the texts (almost 35,000 lines), we had to work with 
samples. We chose 5 samples of 200-240 lines from dif-
ferent parts of the text, and transcribed the parallel texts 
(if available) from all 15 manuscripts, lemmatized the 
samples and tagged them for parts of speech. The manu-
scripts are indicated by the letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, 
H, I, J, K, L, M, N and O. We approached the samples 
as	‘bags	of	words’	and	decided	to	compare	these	bags	of	
words as regards vocabulary (number of unique types 
and tokens) and frequencies of parts of speech. We dif-
ferentiated between ten parts of speech:
00 noun (content word)
02 proper name (content word)
10 adjective
20 main verb (content word)
21 copula / auxiliary verb
30 numeral
4* pronouns
40 personal pronoun
41 demonstrative pronoun
42 relative pronoun
43 interrogative pronoun
44	indefinite	pronoun
45 possessive pronoun
50 adverb
70 preposition
8* conjunction
80 coordinating conjunction
81 subordinating conjunction
82 comparative conjunction
For each part of speech, in each sample we measured the 
absolute frequency, the relative frequency, the average 
of	the	fifteen	samples,	the	standard	deviation,	the	z-score	
and the ranking of the manuscript in comparison with the 
other fourteen manuscripts.
Example
To give an impression of the material, the second line 
of	the	‘Judith’	episode	in	all	fifteen	manuscripts	is	pre-
sented	below.	Judith	was	‘van	liue	wijf	van	herten	man’	
(‘as	to	her	body	(a)	woman,	as	to	her	heart	(a)	man’):
A Van liue wijf van herten man 
B van liue wijf van herten man 
C Van liue wijf van herten man. 
D Van liue wijf van herte man 
E van liue wijf van herten man 
F Van liue wijf van herten man 
G Van liue wijf. van herten man... 
H Van lyue een wijf van herte een man 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 292
I Wijf van liue van herten man
J Van liue wijf van herten man 
K Van liue wijf van herten man 
L Van liue wijf van herten man 
M Van liue wijf van herte man 
N Van liue wijf van herten man 
O van liue wijf van herten man
Manuscript	 H	 has	 two	 indefinite	 pronouns,	 something	
that none of the other manuscripts has. Manuscript I has 
a	different	order	in	the	first	noun	phrase.	The	differences	
in	manuscript	H	will	have	an	influence	on	word	counts	
and the frequencies of parts of speech, while the differ-
ence in manuscript I will not show up in these counts. 
The differences among the manuscripts for this line are 
small. Many other lines show more, and more complex 
differences. 
Fig. 1
Results
Reading	through	all	fifteen	Judith	episodes,	we	find	that	
two of the manuscripts show remarkable differences 
compared to the other thirteen. These manuscripts are 
also the odd ones out in the statistical results. Figure 1 
presents the results for the nouns (excluding names). The 
horizontal axis is the mean of the frequency of nouns in 
all	fifteen	Judith	episodes.	The	vertical	axis	gives	the	z-
scores: the higher a manuscript is located on the graph, 
the	more	significant	the	deviation	from	the	mean.	Eve-
rything	above	z-score	1	may	be	statistically	significant.	
Manuscript I clearly deviates from all the others as to the 
frequency of nouns. Other parts of speech yield different 
results	(cf.	figure	2).	
Fig. 2
In	 the	mean	of	 all	 codes	 in	figure	 3,	 only	E	 and	 I	 are	
above z-score 1. All other manuscripts are below this 
line. They do, however, show some variation, and from 
the point of view of the scholar, this variation is interest-
ing. An evaluation of all results for the different parts of 
speech shows that adjectives differ the most and nouns 
differ	 the	 least.	Only	manuscript	 I	 shows	 a	 significant	
deviation in the frequency of the nouns. Other parts of 
speech that often differ are pronouns, adverbs and – to 
a lesser degree – auxiliary verbs/copula. Names, main 
verbs and conjunctions show more differentiation than 
the nouns excluding names, but not much. These results 
seem	 to	 confirm	 that	 in	 copying	 a	 text,	 scribes	 could	
indeed	 ‘manoeuvre’	 in	 the	area	of	 function	words	 (ad-
verbs, adjectives, etc.), but may have been kept in check 
as to content words (nouns, names, main verbs). The 
only manuscript that deviates wildly in the frequency of 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  293
nouns (i.e. manuscript I) is special. Reading the text, it 
is immediately clear to the researcher that, at least in the 
episode about Judith, it is a very free adaptation of the 
text. In this episode, the scribe clearly has to be seen as 
an author.
Fig. 3
Our paper will present a comparison with the other sam-
ples from the same text. This comparison will show that 
it is unlikely that we will be able to distinguish scribes 
with this method – although, as stated, we can clearly 
spot	an	‘author’	between	the	scribes.	We	hope	to	apply	
some other measures to the corpus, for example type-
token	ratio,	Yule’s	K	and	Burrows’s	Delta.
Conclusions
The analysis and comparison of the vocabulary of cop-
ies of the same text seems to be a promising way to gain 
more insight into the range of freedoms that scribes were 
allowed. Of course, both more tests and a much larger 
corpus are needed. A comparison with other languages 
would also be interesting. The results of this empirical 
approach will promote, for example, the development of 
new	tools	or	the	fine-tuning	of	existing	tools	for	scribal	
measurements (e.g. Spencer & Howe 2001, 2002).
References
Karina van Dalen-Oskam & Joris van Zundert (2007). 
‘Delta for Middle Dutch: Author and copyist distinction 
in	“Walewein”’.	In:	Literary and Linguistic Computing 
22, pp. 345-362.
Karina van Dalen-Oskam and Joris van Zundert (2008). 
‘The Quest for Uniqueness: Author and Copyist Dis-
tinction in Middle Dutch Arthurian Romances based 
on	 Computer-assisted	 Lexicon	 Analysis’.	 In:	 Marijke	
Mooijaart and Marijke van der Wal (eds.) Yesterday’s 
words: contemporary, current and future lexicography. 
[Proceedings of the Third International Conference on 
Historical Lexicography and Lexicology (ICHLL), 21-
23 June 2006, Leiden]. Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing, 2008, pp. 292-304.
Matthew Spencer and Christopher J. Howe (2001). ‘Es-
timating distances between manuscripts based on copy-
ing	 errors’.	 In:	Literary and Linguistic Computing 16, 
pp. 467-484
Matthew Spencer and Christopher J. Howe (2002). 
‘How	accurate	were	scribes?	A	mathematical	model’.	In:	
Literary and Linguistic Computing 17, pp. 311-322
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 294
