Mining texts for image terms: 
the CLiMB project
Judith L. Klavans 
University of Maryland, College Park 
jklavans@umd.edu
Eileen Abels
Drexel University 
eileen.abels@ischool.drexel.edu
Jimmy Lin
University of Maryland, College Park 
jimmylin@umd.edu
Rebecca Passonneau
Columbia University 
becky@cs.columbia.edu
Carolyn	Sheffield
University of Maryland, College Park
Dagobert Soergel
University of Maryland, College Park 
dsoergel@umd.edu
The CLiMB (Computational Linguistics for Metadata Building) project addresses the existing gap in sub-
ject metadata for images, particularly for the domains 
of art history, architecture, and landscape architecture. 
Within each of these domains, image collections are 
increasingly available online yet subject access points 
for these images remain minimal.  In an observational 
study with six image catalogers, we found that typically 
1 – 8 subject terms are assigned, and that many legacy 
records lack subject entries altogether. Studies on end 
users’	image	searching	indicate	that	this	level	of	subject	
description	is	often	insufficient.		In	a	study	of	the	image-
searching behaviors of faculty and graduate students in 
American history, Choi and Rasmussen 2003 found that 
92% of the 38 participants in their study considered the 
textual information associated with the images in the Li-
brary	of	Congress’	American	Memory	Collection	to	be	
inadequate.  The number of subject descriptors assigned 
to an image in this collection is comparable to what we 
found in the exploratory CLiMB studies. Furthermore, 
these searchers submitted more subject-oriented queries 
than known-artist and title queries.  Similar results dem-
onstrating the importance of subject retrieval have been 
reported in other studies, including Keister, Collins, and 
Chen 1994.  
Under	the	hypothesis	that	searchers	do	not	find	images	
they seek partly due to inadequate subject description in 
metadata	fields,	the	CLiMB	project	was	initiated	to	ad-
dress this subject metadata gap by applying automatic 
and	 semi-automatic	 techniques	 to	 the	 identification,	
extraction, and thesaural linking of subject terms. The 
CLiMB Toolkit processes text associated with an image 
through natural language processing (NLP), categoriza-
tion using machine learning (ML), and disambiguation 
techniques	to	identify,	filter,	and	normalize	high-quality	
subject descriptors.  Like Pastra et al. 2003 we use NLP 
techniques	and	domain-specific	ontologies,	although	our	
focus is on associated texts such as art historical surveys 
or curatorial essays rather than captions;  unlike generic 
image search, such as in Google, we analyze beyond 
keywords	 and	 we	 use	 text	 which	 is	 specifically	 and	
clearly related to an image.  For this project, we use the 
standard	Cataloging	Cultural	Objects	 (CCO)	definition	
of subject metadata1 as including terms which provide 
“an	identification,	description,	or	interpretation	of	what	
is depicted in and by a work or image.” 
In order to understand the cataloging process and to in-
form our system design, we conducted studies on the 
image	 cataloging	workflow	 and	 the	 process	 of	 subject	
term assignment.  Our goal was to collect data on the 
humanities-driven process as a whole to be able to incor-
porate	our	results	into	an	existing	workflow	and	thus	as-
sist	a	portion	of	the	workflow	with	automatic	techniques.	
An additional purpose of studying the cataloging process 
was to permit the development of system functionality, 
i.e., the implementation of rules or the use of statistical 
methods to identify high-quality subject descriptors in 
scholarly texts.    As part of the CLiMB evaluation, we 
have	established	a	series	of	test	collections	in	the	fields	
of art history, architecture, and landscape architecture. 
These three domains were selected in part because of the 
existing	 overlap	 in	 domain-specific	 vocabulary.	 	 Test-
ing with distinct but related domains enables us to test 
for disambiguation issues which arise in the context of 
specialized vocabularies.  For example, the Getty Art & 
Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) provides many senses of 
the term panel	which	apply	to	either	the	fine	arts,	archi-
tecture, or both, depending on context.  In the context of 
fine	arts,	panel may refer to a small painting on wood 
whereas in the context of architecture, panel may refer 
to a distinct section of a wall, within a border or frame.
Figure 1 shows the CLiMB architecture which produces 
subject term recommendations that can be used into the 
image	cataloging	workflow	observed	in	visual	resource	
centers:
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  185
Figure 1.  The CLiMB toolkit architecture
CLiMB combines new and pre-existing technologies 
in	 a	 flexible,	 client-side	 architecture	 which	 has	 been	
implemented in a downloadable toolkit and which can 
be	tailored	to	the	user’s	needs.	In	addition	to	matching	
segments of texts to referenced images, we are develop-
ing methods to categorize spans of text (e.g., sentences 
or paragraphs) as to their semantic function relative to 
the image.  For example, a sentence might describe an 
artist’s	 life	 events	 (e.g.	 “during	his	 childhood”,	 “while	
on her trip to Italy”, “at the death of his father”) or the 
style of the work (“impressionism”).  A set of seven 
categories – Image Content, Interpretation, Implemen-
tation, Historical Context, Biographical Information, 
Significance,	and	Comparison	–	has	been	 initially	pro-
posed through textual analysis of art survey texts.  These 
categories have been tested through a series of labeling 
experiments.  Full details are available in Passonneau et 
al. 2008.  The output of this categorization will be incor-
porated in future versions of the Toolkit, and will be used 
as part of the disambiguation component.
An important contribution of the CLiMB project is the 
development of a disambiguation component, enabling 
the system to move beyond standard keyword-based in-
dexing by associating words and terms that have multiple 
meanings which correspond to different descriptors with 
the correct meaning in context. The ability to select one 
sense from many is referred to as lexical disambiguation. 
Results of our ongoing studies on sense disambiguation 
using hierarchically structured faceted thesauri and lexi-
cal resources, such as the Art and Architecture Thesaurus 
and WordNet, will be presented.  We have experimented 
with the use of WordNet, with different levels of the fac-
ets	of	the	AAT,	and	with	different	degrees	of	filtering	for	
modifiers	in	noun	phrases.		We	also	have	results	on	set-
ting weights for each of these factors to determine the 
most accurate disambiguation techniques.
One of the most vexing problems in word sense disam-
biguation is the fact that often several senses could be 
considered correct within a given context.  Therefore, 
evaluation can be a challenge since there may be no 
clear-cut right or wrong.  The need for fuzzy evaluation 
will be discussed in our presentation, with a demonstra-
tion of different ways to measure precision and recall 
against a “moving target” baseline.
Figure 2 shows the CLiMB interface in its current state 
as of Fall 2008; as we use the results of our experimental 
research, this interface may change as of the time of pre-
sentation of the paper.
Figure 2: The CLiMB Toolkit Interface
Note in Figure Two that the collection under review is 
found in the left panel, the image is in the center, the 
analyzed text is shown to the cataloger, with the search-
able Getty thesaural resources (AAT, Thesaurus of Geo-
graphical Names (TGN ) and Union List of Artist Names 
(ULAN)) in the right panel.  The cataloger can select 
subject terms, and when possible, normalize according 
to	 the	Getty	 unique	 identifier.	 	All	 interface	 panes	 are	
flexible,	and	can	be	hidden	or	enlarged,	as	required	by	
the user. Cataloger subject term selections can be ex-
ported in a range of formats (see Export button in upper 
left hand corner of Figure 2) for incorporation into an 
existing catalog record.
To sum, in this paper we will present:  
•	 The problem of subject term access in image re-
trieval
•	 The CLiMB system, which utilizes computational 
linguistics and machine learning to improve basic 
keyword search through:
•	 Semantic categorization of text segments
•	 Disambiguation
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 186
•	 User	evaluation	studies	and	findings
Selected References
Chen, H. (2001) An Analysis of Image Retrieval Tasks in 
the Field of Art History. Information Processing & Man-
agement, Vol. 37: 701-720.
Choi, Y. and  E. Rasmussen (2003) Searching for Imag-
es:	The	Analysis	of	Users’	Queries	for	Image	Retrieval	in	
American History.  Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, Vol. 54: 498-511.
Collins, K. (1998) Providing Subject Access to Images: 
A Study of User Queries. The American Archivist, Vol. 
61: 36-55.
Keister, L.H. (1994) User Types and Queries: Impact 
on Image Access Systems. In: Fidel, R., T.B. Hahn, E. 
Rasmussen, P. J. Smith (eds.): Challenges in Indexing 
Electronic Text and Images. Learned Information for 
the American Society of Information Science, Medford: 
7-22.
Klavans,	 Judith	 L,	 Carolyn	 Sheffield,	 Eileen	 Abels,	
Jimmy Lin, Rebecca Passonneau, Tandeep Sidhu, and 
Dagobert Soergel (2009) Computational Linguistics for 
Metadata Building (CLiMB): Using Text Mining for the 
Automatic	 Identification,	 Categorization,	 and	 Disam-
biguation of Subject Terms for Image Metadata. Journal 
of Multimedia Tools and Applications, Special issue on 
Metadata Mining for Image Understanding  (MMIU) 
42(1):115-138.  Elsevier: Paris.
Passonneau, R., T. Yano, T. Lippincott, J. Klavans (2008) 
Functional Semantic Categories for Art History Text: 
Human Labeling and Preliminary Machine Learning. 3rd 
International Conference on Computer Vision Theory 
and Applications, Workshop on Metadata Mining for 
Image Understanding: 13-22.
Pastra, K., H. Saggion, Y. Wilks, (2003) Intelligent In-
dexing of Crime-Scene Photographs.  In: IEEE Intelli-
gent Systems: Special Issue on Advances in Natural Lan-
guage and Processing, Vol. 18, Iss. 1: 55-61.
Notes
1http://vraweb.org/ccoweb/cco/parttwo_chapter6.html.
