Modes of Composition in Henry 
James: Dictation, Style, and 
What Maisie Knew 
David L. Hoover 
New York University 
david.hoover@nyu.edu
A hundred things hummed at the back of her head, 
but two of these were simple enough. Mrs. Beale 
was by the way, after all, just her stepmother and 
her relative. She was just—and partly for that very 
reason—Sir	 Claude’s	 greatest	 intimate	 (‘lady-
intimate’	was	Maisie’s	 term)	so	 that	what	 together	
they	were	on	Mrs.	Wix’s	prescription	to	give	up	and	
break short off with was for one of them his par-
ticular	favourite	and	for	the	other	her	father’s	wife.	 
     Henry James, What Maisie Knew (1897) 
The	difference	between	 the	styles	of	Henry	James’s	early	 and	 later	 novels	 is	well-known.	No	 author’s	
style is likely to remain constant over a time-span as long 
as	that	between	James’s	first	novel	in	1871	and	his	last	
complete	novel	in	1911,	but	the	change	in	James’s	style	
is so extreme that many readers and critics consider the 
later novels too obscure and enjoy only the early novels. 
Others champion the later novels and consider the early 
novels	immature.	One	critic	notes	that	James’s	late	‘dis-
tortions’	 often	 ‘obliterate	 the	 normal	 elements	 of	 con-
nection and cohesion. When he has undone the usual 
ties,	his	meanings	float	untethered,	grammatically	speak-
ing,	like	particles	in	colloidal	suspension’	(Short	1946:	
73-4). Although most attention has been paid to syntax, 
changes	 in	 James’s	 vocabulary	 are	 equally	 interesting,	
and the frequencies of the most frequent words alone 
very effectively identify when each novel was written 
(Hoover 2007). 
One	often-mentioned	 reason	 for	 the	change	 in	 James’s	
style seems important from a literary perspective and 
is especially amenable to and appropriate for computa-
tional investigation: In 1896, while writing What Maisie 
Knew, James began dictating because of persistent pain 
in his wrist. His most famous typist believed that ‘The 
different note [of the later novels] was possibly due more 
to the substitution of dictation for pen and ink than to any 
profound	change	of	heart’	(Bosanquet	1924:	254).	Edel’s	
biography of James links the elaborate and convoluted 
late sentences with the change in mode of composition 
and	reports	 that	some	of	James’s	friends	claimed	to	be	
able to tell which chapter in Maisie was	the	first	one	he	
dictated (1969: 176-77). Recent interest in media and 
technology, especially at the turn of the twentieth cen-
tury,	has	given	new	significance	to	the	claim	(Cappello	
2007; Thurschwell 2001; Seltzer 1992). The fact that it is 
mentioned by Marshall McLuhan (McLuhan & Zingrone 
1995), and that it appears in Barron’s Notebooks (a study 
guide for students) (1986), the online guide to the Drag-
on Naturally Speaking dictation-to-text program (New-
man 2000), an article on voice recognition in composi-
tion (Honeycutt 2003), Wikipedia (2008), The Ivanhoe 
Game (Bethany	2002),	and	the	fiction	of	Cynthia	Ozick	
(2008), shows its ubiquity, appeal, and relevance to digi-
tal media and digital humanities. 
The	fact	that	James’s	later	style	is	generally	dated	to	the	
late 1890s, just when he begins dictating, has undoubt-
edly encouraged this idea. Despite of the widespread 
currency	of	the	belief	that	dictation	significantly	affect-
ed	 James’s	 style,	 I	 know	of	 no	 attempt	 to	 present	 any	
solid evidence for it. Yet there is strong evidence for 
the	gradual	and	unidirectional	development	of	 James’s	
style	over	his	career	that	casts	doubt	on	any	significant	
effect of the change to dictation. Consider the extraordi-
nary pattern of adoption of characteristically late words 
and abandonment of characteristically early words over 
time	shown	in	Fig.	1.	To	produce	 this	figure,	 I	created	
combined word frequency lists for the seven earliest 
and eight latest novels, then selected all words that are 
at least three times as frequent in the early novels as in 
the late and vice versa. I calculated the percentage of 
tokens represented by early and late words in a selection 
of	novels	and	novellas	throughout	James’s	career.	Note	
how regularly the frequency of early words declines and 
late words increases. These trends continue through the 
middle period and include novels and novellas that had 
no part in the creation of the word lists. The later style 
is associated more with syntax than with vocabulary, but 
the regularity of the vocabulary changes certainly offers 
no support for an abrupt shift between the handwritten 
novels that precede and the dictated novels that follow 
Maisie. 
Now let us examine Maisie itself for evidence of a sig-
nificant	local	shift	in	style	caused	by	the	switch	to	dicta-
tion. Evidence from the most frequent words is shown 
in	Fig.	2.	To	produce	this	figure,	I	created	separate	files	
for the chapters and analyzed them with cluster analy-
sis; to make the graph more readable, I labeled the chap-
ters	‘pre’	(preliminary)-‘ten,’	‘11’-‘20,’	and	‘twenty-1’-
‘thirty-1’.	The	two	main	clusters	in	Fig.	2	do	not	strongly	
reflect	the	structure	of	the	novel:	most	early	chapters	are	
in the left cluster and most middle and later ones in the 
right cluster, but at least three chapters from each group 
appear in each. Among the dozens of novels I have ana-
lyzed, Maisie is unusual in how weakly its narrative 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 146
structure	is	reflected	in	the	relationships	among	the	chap-
ters	(plot	is	not	James’s	major	interest).	Analyses	based	
on the 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, 900, and 
990 MFW all fail to suggest any change-point associated 
with	James’s	adoption	of	dictation.	
Fig. 1 Early and late words in Henry James’s early and 
late novels and novellas
Fig. 2 A Chapter analysis based on the 500 MFW of What 
Maisie Knew 
Consider some other statistics by chapter (see Fig.3). 
Sentence-length is an obvious choice, given the standard 
view	of	James’s	style,	and,	predictably,	it	is	closely	relat-
ed to the percentage of narrative. Some variables sharply 
increase and decrease, but without any obvious change-
point. Furthermore, average sentence length trends irreg-
ularly lower throughout the novel, as does the percent-
age of narrative, suggesting, unsurprisingly, that James 
uses	shorter	sentences	in	dialogue,	but	conflicting	with	
the idea that dictation caused long, rambling sentences. 
As Fig. 4 shows, average word length and the frequency 
of long words also trend lower, but there is nothing to 
suggest a change caused by dictation. 
Fig. 3 Vocabulary, sentence-length, % narrative, and 
word-length in chapters of Maisie 
Fig. 4 Ave. word-length, one-letter words, and long words 
in chapters of Maisie 
The	next	 two	figures	show	the	distribution	of	punctua-
tion across the chapters. There are obvious correlations 
between some punctuation marks and the percentage 
of narrative, and some surprising correlations (why are 
there more commas in narrative?). Nothing, however, 
suggests any shift caused by a change in the mode of 
composition. 
Fig. 5 Some punctuation marks and percent of narrative in 
chapters of Maisie. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  147
Fig. 8 Chronological development in the style of Henry 
James
References 
Barron’s	Notebooks.	The	Turn	of	the	Screw.	(1986).	Bar-
ron’s	Educational	Series,	 Inc.	Online.	Available:	http://
www.pinkmonkey.com/booknotes/barrons/turnscr2.asp. 
Accessed 11/6/08.
Bosanquet, Theodora. (1924). Henry James at Work. 
London: Hogarth Press.
Cappello, Mary. (2007). Awkward: A Detour. New York: 
Bellevue Literary Press.
Wikipedia. (2008). Henry James. Online. Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_James.Accessed 
11/4/08.
Edel, Leon. (1969). Henry James: The Treacherous 
Years, 1895-1901. Philadelphia, Lippincott.
Honeycutt, Lee. (2003). Researching the use of voice 
recognition writing software, Computers and Composi-
tion 20(1): 77-95.
Hoover, David L. (2007). Corpus Stylistics, Stylometry, 
and the Styles of Henry James, Style 41: 174-203.
Bethany [Nowviskie]. (2002). The Ivanhoe Game, 
‘The	 Turn	 of	 the	 Screw.’	 Online.	 Available:	 http://
speculativecomputing.org/greymatter/ivanhoe/roles/ar-
chives/00000019.htm Accessed 11/4/08.
James, Henry. (1897). What Maisie Knew. New York: 
Stone. Online. Available:
h t tp : / / ia331316.us .a rch ive .org /0 / i tems/what -
maisieknew00jamerich/whatmaisieknew00jamerich_
djvu.txt
Fig. 6 Other punctuation marks in chapters of Maisie 
Finally, Fig. 7 displays vocabulary richness, sentence-
length,	 and	 the	 percentage	 of	 short	 words	 in	 James’s	
novels over time, and Fig. 8 shows just how regularly 
the	 frequency	 of	 frequent	words	 characterizes	 James’s	
chronological development. The patterns shown in these 
graphs	are	difficult	to	reconcile	with	any	significant	sty-
listic	change	caused	by	James’s	adoption	of	dictation	in	
1896. (The slightly anomalous position of The Outcry in 
Fig. 8 may be related to the fact that it is a novelization 
of a play.) 
Fig. 7 Vocabulary richness, sentence-length, and word-
length in James’s novels. 
In conclusion, the gradual, unidirectional nature of the 
changes	 in	 James’s	 style	 does	 not	 provide	 support	 for	
any radical alteration caused by dictation. As reason-
able as this idea has seemed, and as productive as it has 
been for speculation about media, machines, and literary 
production, such speculation may have to be revised or 
abandoned in the light of new kinds of evidence–evi-
dence only available by computational examination of 
a	corpus	of	 James’s	work.	 If	 further	 research	confirms	
these preliminary results, computational stylistics may 
have an important contribution to make to literary stud-
ies in this case. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 148
