Modeling the Lexicon with 
Ontologies
Kip	Canfield 
University of Maryland, UMBC 
canfield@umbc.edu
Introduction
The use of markup languages (typically XML) for modeling the natural language lexicon is currently 
widespread. It allows a standard representation format 
that is friendly to the web, interoperable, and leverages 
horizontal standards in that all general XML tools can 
be used (Simons 2004). This paper makes an argument 
for elaborating this practice to use ontologies for mod-
eling lexicons. These would be commonly serialized in 
OWL/XML, but could use the standard XML transfor-
mation capability to use other serializations without any 
problem. The Lexical Markup Framework (LMF) is a 
popular ISO standard candidate for lexicons and shows 
the	 benefits	 described	 above.	 Since	LMF	 is	XML	 and	
transformations can allow one schema to be changed 
into another, using ontologies in this context has been 
suggested such as using an LMF to OWL transforma-
tion (Francopoulo 2007) to incorporate ontologies into a 
service-oriented language infrastructure (Hayashi 2008). 
This paper proposes using ontologies in a much more 
local way to support development and testing of natural 
language lexicons, but at the same time supporting the 
goals of interoperability and standards use. The argu-
ment for this novel use of the semantic web technology 
is advanced using a scenario from the development of a 
computational lexicon of the Navajo language of North 
America.
Methods
In the context of a long running project to create a com-
putational resource for the Navajo lexicon that can be 
used for reading and annotating a corpus of Navajo texts, 
an XML-based model of the Navajo lexicon was devel-
oped. This lexicon has a native format of an XML sche-
ma, but leverages transformations to customize the for-
mat for any particular use. For example, the web based 
applications that display texts from the corpus and allow 
access to the lexicon, use a JSON transform since that 
is most convenient for web applications. Similarly, the 
lexicon can be transformed to OWL for creating an on-
tology. The ontology can be used in much the same way 
as LMF documents or databases have been used (Beck 
2007), but with additional useful properties.
The class structure from the original lexicon model is 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 78
easily transformed to OWL classes. Navajo verbs show 
a template structure with complex morphology that 
can	 be	 seen	 as	 a	 slot/filler	 structure	were	 only	 certain	
kinds	of	affixes	can	be	put	 into	any	slot	 (Young	1992;	
Faltz 1998). So the Navajo verb class has an ordered 
sequence of properties that correspond to the template 
(affix	order=outer,	distributed	plural,	inner,	object,	sub-
ject,	 classifier,	 stem).	 Some	 of	 the	 slot	 content	 can	 be	
predicted	from	context	and	some	must	be	defined	in	the	
lexicon. For an OWL ontology, this would be the infor-
mation in the individual. For example, the individual for 
the class verb “cut it out” would be:
(1) individual V2 is Verb and OuterPx=ha, Transi-
tive=1,	Conjugation=S,	Classifier=ł,	Sid=2,	Gloss=”cut	
it out”;
These examples use the non-XML serialization from the 
Bossam reasoner (Jang 2004) for ease of human reading. 
Two	other	 classes	 are	defined	 for	 the	 stem	set	 and	 the	
subject	prefixes.	A	stem	set	is	a	set	of	bound	stems	that	
change shape depending on the verb mode and aspect. A 
sample individual stem from the class stem set (StemSet) 
is:
(2) individual S3 is StemSet and Sid=2, Root=gizh, 
Mode=I, Aspect=cont, Stem=géésh;
The stem in (2) is only for verbs with imperfective mode 
and continuative aspect and there would be 5 stems in 
the	set.	The	subject	prefixes	vary	widely	depending	on	
the conjugation type and other parameters. A sample in-
dividual	from	the	class	subject	prefix	(SubPxSet)	is:
(3) individual Sj2 is SubPxSet and Mode=I, 
Conjugation=S, Pnum=3, SubjPx=Ø;
This	 subject	prefix	 is	 for	 the	 ‘Simple’	 conjugation	and	
the third person. The main point being that many of the 
parts of an underlying form for the verb (1) are predict-
able and so do not appear in the lexical entry. In order to 
supply these predictable parts, the semantic web exten-
sion for ontologies - the Semantic Web Rule Language 
(SWRL) is used. This allows rules to apply reasoning to 
the individuals in the ontology. For example, since the 
distributive plural is only for 3 or more, a simple rule 
using	unification	can	add	that	prefix	of	‘da.’	(Pnum=8	is	
the person number for the 8th member of a listing of the 
conjugation. Navajo has both a 3rd and 4th person, so 
the	9th	would	be	the	first	member	after	the	dual	plurals.)
(4) rule Rule1 is if Verb(?v) and Pnum(?x) and [?x>8] 
then DistPlPx(?v, da);
This also uses the Bossam rule serialization for ease of 
reading, but it can also read the XML serialization of 
SWRL. Similarly all the predictable parts of the underly-
ing verb form are generated. For example, the verb for 
“cut it out” in the third person distributive plural is gen-
erated by the rule base:
(5) OuterPx= nav:ha, DistPlPx= nav:da, ObjPx= nav:y, 
InnerPx=	nav:Ø,	SubjPx=	nav:Ø,	Classifier=	nav:ł,	
Stem= nav:géésh
The output in (5) shows that each slot in the template has 
been	correctly	filled	using	the	information	in	the	lexical	
entry and using rules (nav: is the namespace). The un-
derlying	form	for	that	verb	is	ha-da-y-Ø-Ø-ł-géésh.	This	
can in turn be transformed to the surface form using a set 
of morphophonemic rules that have been previously de-
veloped	for	this	project.	It	uses	the	finite	state	morphol-
ogy	tool	xfst	(Beesley	2003)	and	produces	hadeiłgéésh	
which is the distributive third person of the surface form. 
This is a command line tool and so the above can be 
done with a single unix pipeline. This is an effective tool 
for checking lexical entries. For example, a complete 
paradigm can be cosnstructed using the lexical ontology 
rules to produce the underlying form (left-side of (6)) 
and xfst to produce the surface form (right-side of (6)) :
(6) Complete imperfective paradigm for: individual P5 
is Verb and OuterPx=Ø, Transitive=0, Conjugation=S, 
Classifier=Ø,	Sid=5,	Gloss=”cry”;
1sing: Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-sh-Ø-cha -> yishcha 
2sing: Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-ni-Ø-cha -> nicha 
3sing: Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-cha -> yicha 
4sing: Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-j-Ø-cha -> jicha 
1dual: Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-iid-Ø-cha -> yiicha 
2dual: Ø-Ø-Ø-Ø-oh-Ø-cha -> wohcha 
1distpl: Ø-Ø-Ø-da-iid-Ø-cha -> deiicha 
2distpl:Ø-Ø-Ø -da-oh-Ø-cha -> daohcha 
3distpl: Ø-Ø-Ø-da-Ø-cha -> daacha 
4distpl: Ø-Ø-Ø-da-j-Ø-cha -> dajicha
Analysis and Conclusions
Using	ontologies	for	modeling	the	lexicon	has	benefits	
at both the local, lexicographer level and the global level 
for searching and interoperation. The approach has par-
ticular	benefit	for	languages	with	complex	morphology.	
As seen in this example from the Navajo language, the 
process for setting up an underlying form has many parts 
that can be modeled in the lexicon using the Semantic 
Web technology. Typically, lexical entries would be iso-
lated for grammatical exposition, but with this approach, 
the lexicon becomes an active resource that incorporates 
those grammatical facts. Furthermore, the technology is 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  79
horizontal in nature, meaning that the tools used are not 
particular to this application or even this class of appli-
cations. That makes it is easier for everyone to under-
stand it and share it based on familiarity with the general 
technology of the Semantic Web. This helps to avoid the 
short	‘half-life’	common	to	computational	lexicography	
projects (Maxwell 2008).
More globally, this approach allows the lexical model 
to participate in the more common applications of the 
Semantic Web such as annotation, search, and linking 
resources on the Internet. The resource can also partici-
pate in global semantic relations as with WordNet. For 
the Navajo lexicon described here, connecting the model 
to other ontologies was made simple. For example, each 
class is connected to the GOLD general OWL ontology 
for linguistic concepts (Farrar 2003) dynamically over 
the Internet using the built-in OWL property owl:sameAs 
which links an individual to an individual. Since much 
of	the	terminology	in	any	particular	language’s	linguis-
tic literature can be divergent, this helps interoperation 
(Chiarcos 2008).
References
Beck, H. (2007). Contextual Archiving with Linguistic 
Analysis: An Ontology-Based Approach to Developing a 
Linguistic Database. Workshop Proceedings of “Toward 
the Interoperability of Language Resources”, July 13-15 
at Stanford University in conjunction with the 2007 LSA 
Summer Institute, http://linguistlist.org/tilr/proceed-
ings2.cfm, (accessed 11/11/2008).
Beesley, K. and Karttunen, L. (2003). Finite State Mor-
phology. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Chiarcos, C. (2008). An ontology of linguistic annota-
tions. LDV-Forum, 23 (1) , 1-16, http://www.ldv-forum.
org/?language=en, (accessed 11/11/2008).
Faltz, L. (1998). The Navajo Verb. Albuquerque: Univer-
sity of New Mexico Press.
Farrar, S. and Langendoen, T. (2003). A Linguistic On-
tology for the Semantic Web. GLOT International 7(3), 
97-100, http://www.linguistlist.org/emeld/documents/
GLOT-LinguisticOntology.pdf, (accessed 11/11/2008).
Francopoulo, G. (2007). Strategy for an OWL specifica-
tion of LMF. http://www.lexicalmarkupframework.org/ 
(accessed 11/11/2008).
Hayashi, Y., Declerck, T., Buitelaar, P. and Monachini, 
M. (2008). Ontologies for a Global Language Infra-
structure. The First International Conference on Global 
Interoperability for Language Resources (ICGL2008), 
http://langrid.nict.go.jp/en/publication.html, (accessed 
11/11/2008).
Jang, M. and Sohn, J. (2004). Bossam: An Extended 
Rule Engine for OWL Inferencing. Antoniou, G. and 
Boley, H.(Eds.): RuleML 2004, LNCS 3323, 128–138, 
http://bossam.wordpress.com/documentation/, (accessed 
11/11/2008).
Simons, G., Lewis, W., Farrar, S., Langendoen, D., 
Fitzsimons, B. & Gonzalez, H. (2004). The Semantics of 
Markup: Mapping Legacy Markup Schemas to a Com-
mon Semantics. Proceedings of the XMLNLP Work-
shop, Association for Computational Linguistics, Barce-
lona, Spain, http://emeld.org/documents/SOMFinal1col.
pdf, (accessed 11/11/2008).
Maxwell, M. and David, A. (2008). Interoperable Gram-
mars. The First International Conference on Global In-
teroperability for Language Resources, Hong Kong, Jan-
uary, http://icgl.ctl.cityu.edu.hk/, (accessed 11/11/2008).
Young, R. and Morgan, W. (1992). Analytical Lexicon of 
Navajo. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 80
