No Job for Techies: 
Collaborative Modeling as an 
intellectual activity of the analyst 
and scholar in the development 
of formal representations of 
scholarly materials.
John Bradley 
King’s	College	London 
john.bradley@kcl.ac.uk
This paper deals presents some thinking about the na-ture of the workthat are involved in the development 
of digital resources for the humanities; and the partici-
pants in that work.  It has become almost a truism among 
many in the digital humanities (DH) that digital resource 
building is, of necessity, a kind of collaborative activity. 
The scholar who is sponsoring the resource brings to the 
table the materials that s/he wishes to work with, and 
contributes the issues that these materials raise that are 
of scholarly importance.  However, s/he is not going to 
be in the position to grapple his/herself with the myriad 
technical matters that arise from using the technology 
to represent them.  Instead, as this truism goes, s/he 
will need technical support to help him/her implement 
his/her vision and present it.  In this view of things, the 
partnership is based on the scholar being responsible for 
the content, and the technologist who is given the job of 
representing the vision of the scholar.  This view of the 
resulting partnership is not equal in nature (indeed, the 
term	‘techie’,	which	I	hear	surprisingly	often	applied	to	
the	technical	person	in	this	kind	of	partnership,	confirms	
this), and it is based on the scholar as faculty and the 
technician as staff.		It	is	widespread	and	influences	much	
of what has been written about the collaboration models 
that currently exist.  See, for example Zorich 2007-8, or 
Michel et al. 2003, in which there is both frequent refer-
ence to “faculty” and “technician”, and where the main 
interest in actual intellectual collaboration is not between 
the scholar and his technical support, but the different 
one which might be developed between academics from 
different disciplines (such as between History and a Fine 
Arts department, or, interestingly, between a humanities 
department and computer science).
The	Centre	for	Computing	in	the	Humanities	at	King’s	
College	London	 (CCH)	 operates	 differently.	 	The	 first	
sign of this is that CCH is set up as a full academic de-
partment within the School of Humanities.  Thus, it has a 
1www.lyrik-und-lied.de; www.freiburger-anthologie.de
2Ähnliche Projekte für das Deutsche sind „YASP“ 
<http://wiki.cl.uni-heidelberg.de/YetAnotherSynthet-
icPoem> und das Projekt „ErMaStat“: Dimpel, Friedrich 
Michael: Computergestützte textstatistische Untersuc-
hungen an mittelhochdeutschen Texten. 2004.
3Was „richtig“ in diesem Zusammenhang bedeutet, ist 
hier nachzulesen (Fußnote 41): <http://computerphilolo-
gie.tu-darmstadt.de/jg07/bobgehl.html#FN41> 
4Enwickelt von Regine Müller: http://www.cross-plus-a.
com/segmenti.htm
5Friedrich Hebbel: Abendlied . zitiert nach <http://
w w w. l y r i k - u n d - l i e d . d e / l l . p l ? k a t = t y p . s h o w.
poem&ds=2580&id=4082> 
6Schlawe, Fritz: Die deutschen Strophenformen. Sys-
tematisch-chronologisches Register zur deutschen Lyrik 
1600-1950. 1972. / Frank, Horst Joachim: Handbuch der 
deutschen Strophenformen. Tübingen/Basel. 1993.
7Eine Testversion des Programms ist nun online unter: 
<http://www.poetron-zone.de/metricalizer/generator.
php>. 
8,,Regelmäßige“ Gedichte sind nach unserem Verstän-
dnis Gedichte, die aus einer strophenweise in sich re-
gelmäßigen Abfolge von betonten und unbetonten Sil-
ben bestehen, die mit dem gleichen Muster pro Vers 
beginnen müssen, aber unterschiedliche Endpunkte des 
Musters zulassen. Ein Muster ist die kleinste sich wie-
derholende Struktur von betonten und unbetonten Silben 
innerhalb eines Verses (im Prinzip identisch mit einem 
Versfuß).
9Eine	detaillierte	Beschreibung	des	Projektes	findet	sich	
nun online unter: <http://computerphilologie.tu-darm-
stadt.de/jg07/bobgehl.html>. Der gesamte Regelsatz ist 
noch nicht für eine Außendarstellung vorbereitet. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  73
combined teaching and research mission not unlike other 
academic departments – although in the case of CCH its 
research is based around the Digital Humanities rather 
than any conventional humanities discipline. Indeed, 
CCH has been able to take creative advantage of the UK 
academic context which does not divide its staff quite so 
clearly into faculty and staff.
Resources developed at CCH are, of course, still meant 
to express the scholarly interpretive inputs of their schol-
arly partners, but the work to achieve this is carried out 
with extended intellectual collaboration between us and 
our discipline partners.  Resources that emerge from this 
process	 are	 something	 like	 John	Unsworth’s	Thematic 
Research Collections	(Unsworth	2000)	–	objects	defined	
by Carole L. Palmer as ‘digital aggregations of primary 
sources	and	related	materials	that	support	research	[…]’	
(Palmer 2004, p. 348), even if some of them, for example 
the several prosopographies in which we have been in-
volved, cannot be properly described as ‘digital aggrega-
tions	of	primary	sources’.
Another key difference is in how we name, and therefore 
consider, our technical staff.  We view our key contribu-
tors (both in the context of XML and TEI, or in the con-
text of database design) not at technicians, but as ana-
lysts,	 with	 significant	 intellectual	 input	 to	 the	 projects	
they work on. The work that emerges from the scholar/
analyst partnership shares something with the kind of 
software design process described by the Scandinavian 
Design School (see Greenbaum and Kyng 1991 for an 
extensive introduction), who are interested in what they 
describe as ‘the sociological and anthropological area of 
system	design’	(Sissen	1998	p.	11).	 	One	of	the	design	
strategies	they	have	identified	they	call	Collaborative (or 
Participatory) Design.
For the CCH Analyst the work centers on the central task 
of modelling	the	data	(largely	in	the	sense	of	McCarty’s	
view of modelling ( McCarty 2004)).  In our resource-
development projects we try to develop a digital repre-
sentation	of	some	significant	part	of	the	scholar’s	intel-
lectual model by formalising it. By expressing some part 
of	the	interpretative	model	in	sufficiently	formal	terms,	
the computer – and therefore the digital tools that we 
develop to present the materials to end users – can better 
exploit it to provide an enriched kind of interaction. This 
formal model is wrapped up tightly with the resource 
objects that the project delivers, and formally represents 
some	 significant	 aspects	 of	 the	 scholar’s	 interpretation	
of his/her materials. The modelling task is not so much 
one of simply applying an existing model (such as, say, 
Dublin Core or even TEI or CIDOC, although these are, 
of course, often used as building blocks) to materials of 
interest to our scholar-partners, but to develop a model 
that	specifically	represents	the	interpretative	framework	
that the scholars themselves are developing.
Furthermore, the resulting model does not emerge solely 
from the scholar speaking about what is to go into it and 
the analyst writing it down.  Instead, the model devel-
ops as a bilateral collaborative activity.  The scholar, of 
course, brings a deep knowledge of the subject, and in 
particular an understanding of where the thorny bits lie. 
The analyst, in turn, brings an understanding of formal 
methods of modelling and combines this with an experi-
ence of dealing with complex humanities material that 
has arisen from other projects in which s/he has partici-
pated.  S/he also acts to clarify structures (naming, at-
tributes and relationships) that are essential to the model. 
Out of this comes new understanding for both the schol-
ar and analyst partners.  As Finken (1998) says:
Cooperative Design has […] a central and continual discourse 
about egalitarity [sic]. This presupposes that users and design-
ers enter a work setting of mutual learning, where they are equal 
partners; the users are said to be skilled experts, the designers are 
technological experts. (p 6)
The amount of work, and exchanging of issues and ideas 
in both direction shows that the model is a joint intel-
lectual product.  Our partners sometimes tell us that the 
resulting	model	has	 ideas	sufficiently	 intertwined	from	
both the partners that it is not possible to separate them.
Since modelling is both an intellectual activity, and a 
collaborative one, at CCH we have found it important 
to recognise the work of the analyst as am intellectual 
activity that should usefully be considered as research 
or at least research-like.  Therefore, as with scholarly re-
search	output,	the	analyst’s	work	also	benefits	from	the	
sharing of it with other professionals.  As Finken says 
about developers:
The practitioners are not unambiguous developers, designers 
and/or	technological	experts;	they	are	scientific	designers,	which	
implies that they make a living by doing research. This means, 
that	 the	 scientific	 designers	 test	 different	 methods,	 techniques	
or theoretical hypothesis during a period of time, and then later 
write about their experiences. So besides doing system design, 
the designers also address a community of researchers, who also 
have	 interests	 in	 the	 scientific	 side	 of	 system	 design.	 (Finken	
1998, p. 8)
How, then, could the academy foster an environment 
where such intellectual activity can occur?  First, it 
should provide an environment that sustains these kinds 
of intellectual partnerships, and where a kind of peer 
relationship between the designer and the scholar is 
supported and acknowledged.  Second, it should recog-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 74
nise that the work of the analyst contains elements of 
research in its own right, and that the analyst needs to be 
recognised as a researcher in broadly the same way as 
the academic is.  In other words, the analyst may not be 
faculty, but they are not support staff either.
CCH’s	role	as	an	academic	department	within	Humani-
ties, and the role of its staff analysts and developers as, 
at least in part, academic individuals has meant that CCH 
is particularly well placed  to explore some of these is-
sues.  For example, all CCH staff are encouraged to do 
research or research-like work that can result in tradi-
tional outputs such as conference papers or articles. 
However, both CCH and the School of Humanities at 
KCL are still struggling with some the implications of 
this.  What, exactly, is meant by research for the model-
ling analyst?  How can research time be found for the 
analyst, and what are the appropriate research outputs 
for	 these	 individuals?	How	does	 this	work	 fit	 into	 the	
teaching mandate for CCH?
My presentation will draw on examples from our experi-
ence to illustrate how the analyst role, even though tech-
nical in orientation, participates in the intellectual and 
academic development of digital resources, and how this 
technical work can be made more evidently into an intel-
lectual one with the potential to appear as research.  In 
this	way,	the	analyst’s	contribution	shares,	in	some	ways	
at least, many of the aspects of the scholarly output of 
our	projects’	discipline-based	partners.
References
Finken, Sisse (1998). Truth Is a Thing of This World: 
A Foucaultian Analysis of the Discoursive Construc-
tion and Constitution of Cooperative Design. Available 
online through http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
summary?doi=10.1.1.5.3190. Accessed 7 November 
2008. 
Greenbaum, Joan and Morten Kyng (eds) (1991). De-
sign at Work: Cooperative Design of Computer Systems. 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Palmer, Carole L. (2004). “Thematic Research Collec-
tions”. In Schreibman, Susan, Ray Siemens and John 
Unsworth (eds), A Companion to Digital Humanities. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 348-365. Also 
online at http://www.digitalhumanities.org/companion/
(chapter 24). Accessed 7 November 2008.
McCarty, Willard (2004). “Modeling: A Study in Words 
and Meanings”. In Schreibman, Susan, Ray Siemens and 
John Unsworth (eds), A Companion to Digital Humani-
ties. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 254-270. 
Also online at http://www.digitalhumanities.org/com-
panion/ (chapter 19). Accessed 7 November 2008.
Mitchell, William J., Alan S. Inouye and Marjory S. Blu-
menthal (eds) (2003). Beyond Productivity: Information 
Technology, Innovation, and Creativity. A report for the 
National Research Council of the National Academics. 
Washington D.C.: The National Academies Press. Pp. 
251.
Unsworth, John. (2000). Thematic Research Collec-
tions.  Paper presented at the Modern Language Asso-
ciation Annual Conference, December 28, Washington, 
DC.  Available online at http://iath.virginia.edu/~jmu2m/
MLA.00/. Accessed 7 November 2008.
Zorich, Diane M. (2007, 2008). A Survey of Digital Hu-
manities Centers in the United States. Council on Li-
brary and Information Resources.  Online at http://www.
uvasci.org/wp-content/uploads/2008/06/dhc-survey-
final-rept-2008_05_22-for-distribution.pdf.	 Accessed	 7	
November 2008.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  75
