On Building a Full-Text Digital 
Library of Land Deeds of 
Taiwan
Jieh Hsiang 
National Taiwan University 
jhsiang@ntu.edu.tw
Szu-Pei Chen 
National Taiwan University 
gail@turing.csie.ntu.edu.tw
Hsieh Chang Tu 
National Taiwan University
tu@turing.csie.ntu.edu.tw 
In this paper we present a full-text digital library of Taiwanese land deeds. Land deeds were the only 
proof of land activities such as transaction of ownership 
and leasing in Taiwan before 1900. They form a major 
part of the primary documents at the grassroot level in 
pre-1900 Taiwan, and are extremely valuable for study-
ing the evolution of the Taiwanese society. 
Land	deeds,	on	the	other	hand,	are	difficult	to	study	be-
cause they are hand-written and hard to read.  Further-
more, they are scattered in many different locations and, 
in some cases, in the hands of families and private col-
lectors.  
In order to make the land deeds more accessible to re-
searchers and educators, the Council for Cultural Affairs 
of Taiwan embarked on a major effort to organize avail-
able land deeds and typed them as machine readable full-
text.  Based on this collection and collections from other 
sources, the National Taiwan University built a full-text 
digital library of Taiwanese land deeds.  The current size 
of the collection is over 23,000 which, according to one 
estimation, cover about 50% of all existing land deeds.1 
The collection will be expanded to around 30,000 by the 
end of the year. 
Our digital library is built with the goal of providing an 
electronic research environment for historians to conduct 
research using land deeds.  Thus in addition to providing 
full-text search and retrieval, we developed a concept of 
regarding the query return as a sub-collection and built 
tools	 to	 help	 the	 user	 find	 meaning	 and	 relationships	
at the collection level.  Post-processing presentation, 
term frequency analysis and co-occurrence, and relation 
graphs are some of the tools described in this paper. We 
believe that our digital library will bring Taiwanese his-
torical research using land deeds to a different horizon.
Land Deeds of Taiwan 
Before Taiwan was ceded to Japan by the Chinese Qing 
Dynasty after the Sino-Japanese War of 1895, land deeds 
were the only proof of ownership and transaction of land 
in Taiwan.  Land deeds were, thus, a centrally impor-
tant primary source for studying the 300 years written 
history of pre-1900 Taiwanese society (Wu, Ang, Lee, 
Lin, 2004).  Even after the modernization of land ad-
ministration by the Japanese, many families still kept the 
old land deeds either as part of the family heritage or 
due to the mistrust of the government.  Many, however, 
were destroyed or discarded since they lost their origi-
nal	significance.	During	the	early	stage	of	the	Japanese	
occupation, the government conducted research on the 
old administrative systems and customs and produced 
three series of books totalling 40 volumes, many of 
which contained transcriptions of land deeds as exam-
ples.  During the reform of the land administration, the 
Japanese government sent surveyors to systematically 
transcribe land deeds so that they can be convert into 
modern land administrative records.  In the latter en-
deavor, about 16,000 were collected.  Their transcribed 
versions (copied verbatim by hand) are scattered in the 
13,855 volumes of the Archives of the Japanese Taiwan 
Governor-Generals (Wang 1993).  After Taiwan was re-
turned to Chinese rule in 1945 after the 2nd World War, 
some research institutes and researchers recognized the 
importance of the land deeds and made efforts to col-
lect them. The most notable, and largest scale such ef-
fort was conducted between 1976 and 1983 by a team 
lead by the historian Wang Shih-Ching who, commis-
sioned by the Committee for Taiwan Historical Studies, 
Association for Asian Studies, U.S.A., collected about 
5,600 land deeds and published a six volume catalog 
Taiwanese Historical Documents in Private Holdings 
(Wang, 1977).  The photocopies of the land deeds were 
bound into more than 100 volumes.  Other notable col-
lections were kept at the National Taiwan University, the 
Institute of Taiwanese History of the Academia Sinica, 
the National Taiwan Library, and by various private col-
lectors.  Scores of books containing the images of some 
land deeds have appeared in the past ten years.  Wang 
estimated (1993, pp. 71) that there are 20,000 land deeds 
in the hands of private collectors, libraries, museums and 
research	institutes	that	were	not	included	in	the	official	
collections. That makes the total number of such land 
deeds about 40,000.  Our experience in the past ten years 
of digitization tells us there should be more, although we 
cannot give a reasonable estimation.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 86
What is in a Land Deed?
Land deeds of Taiwan are contracts about various ac-
tions involving lands, such as the commission by the 
government to cultivate previously un-owned land, the 
division of family properties, the transaction of owner-
ship, the rental of farming right, the pawning of land, etc. 
They were hand written and were usually prepared by a 
scrivener. A land deed usually consists of the following 
elements:
•	 The type of the land deed: selling, renting, pawn-
ing, etc.
•	 the “seller” (or owner) of the land,
•	 the “buyer” (or lender) of the land,
•	 the location of the land and its boundaries (usually 
marked on all four directions using neighboring 
landmarks such as river, road, building, pond, or 
even trees),
•	 the cost: money, maybe accompanied by other 
properties such as houses, cows, storage sheds, and 
farming tools,
•	 the names of witnesses and the scrivener, and
•	 the date.
The following is an example of a typical land deed.
Fig. 1  A typical land deed of Taiwan
What Kind of Research can be done with 
Land Deeds
While	each	land	deed	may	have	significance	only	to	its	
owner, the collection as a whole provides a fascinating 
glimpse into the pre-1900 Taiwanese grassroots society. 
Through these land deeds, one can study the develop-
ment of a region, or the overall land management, soci-
ety, economy, and law of pre-1900 Taiwan. Furthermore, 
since many of the deeds were contracts between indig-
enous people of Taiwan and the Han immigrants from 
China, they also provide clues to the intricate relation-
ship among the various peoples of Taiwan (Hong, 2002), 
the transition of rights to land, and the gradual assimila-
tion of the indigenous people (in particular the Pinpu 平
埔族群) into the Han society. 
Org. Collection Number of 
Land Deeds
NTL The Archives of the Japanese 
Taiwan Governor-Generals
15,899
Published Materials 1,831
Private Collections 171
NTU Anli Dashe Archive 2,653
Published Materials 767
The Collection of Zheng Fam-
ily of Xinzhu
383
Land Deeds from the Depart-
ment of Anthropology of 
National Taiwan University
362
Land Deeds from the Taipei 
City Archive
153
Land Deeds of Southern 
Taiwan
87
TCCC Published Materials 944
Total Number of Land Deeds 23,250
Our Collections of Land Deeds of Taiwan
In 2003 and 2004, the Council for Cultural Affairs (CCA) 
of Taiwan commissioned the National Taichung Library 
(NTL) and Professor Lee Wen-Liang of NTU to collect 
and digitize (in full text) the hand-written copies of land 
deeds from the Archives of the Japanese Taiwan Gover-
nor-Generals. In this project, NTL keyed-in the full text 
of 15,899 land deeds from the Archives of the Japanese 
Taiwan Governor-Generals. In the meantime, National 
Taiwan University (NTU) and Taichung County Cultural 
Center (TCCC) also digitized their own collections of 
land deeds, most notably the Anli Dashe Archive. To-
gether, NTL, NTU, and TCCC have collected more than 
23,000 land deeds in Taiwan, all incorporated into Tai-
wan History Digital Library (THDL), a full-text digital 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  87
library of primary historical documents that we built to 
serve as a research environment for researchers in Tai-
wanese history and other disciplines.  All of the deeds 
are available in searchable full text, with metadata and, 
in some cases, images. 
The building of content is an on-going effort.  We project 
that the size of our collection will reach 30,000 by the 
end of the year.
A Research Environment for Land Deeds
We have incorporated the above-mentioned collections 
of Taiwanese land deeds into Taiwan History Digital Li-
brary (THDL) (Chen, Hsiang, Tu, and Wu, 2007), which 
is built with the goal of providing an electronic research 
environment for historians.  Since our primary goal is to 
build a digital library to be used by researchers, we spent 
a great amount of time interacting with historians and 
built	tools	that	they	would	find	useful	in	their	research.	
Full-text search is, in our view, the most basic facility. 
However, what is more important is how to help the user 
analyze the query results once they are retrieved.  
We developed a methodology that treats query returns as 
a sub-collection, instead of as individual (and indepen-
dent)	documents.		This	seems	to	reflect	better	the	need	of	
researchers,	who	usually	look	for	significance	emerged	
from a set of land deeds.  Under this philosophy, we have 
built extensive post-query classification facilities, which 
classify and present the query results according to attri-
butes such as year, type of deeds, origin, etc.  We also 
provide term frequency analysis which, using the 50,000 
terms (names and locations, mostly extracted automati-
cally) appeared in the collection, analyzes relationships 
such as geographic locations, co-occurrences, people in-
volved.
The co-occurrence and temporal relationships are further 
analyzed in the line chart of temporal distribution fa-
cility provided, which gives a visual representation that 
makes observation easier.   As mentioned before, each 
land deed features a list of attributes.  These attributes 
can, in principle at least, be extracted from a deed.  This 
work is quite laborious and is still under way.  But we 
have developed an XML format that captures the attri-
butes and, more importantly, makes it easy to build rela-
tion graphs that show the relationship among land deeds. 
Our preliminary experiments show that these graphs can 
play	a	significant	role	in	the	study	of	land	deeds.
In the following, we present the aforementioned features 
in more detail.
Query Returns as a Sub-Collection
Historians usually do not look at a single document but, 
rather,	a	group	of	documents	and	try	to	find	significance	
through their relationship.  For example, land deeds 
from the same region as a whole may reveal the gradual 
change of land ownership from one ethnic group to an-
other which, obvious, cannot be observed from a single 
document. For this purpose, we developed a concept that 
regards the query returns as a sub-collection and built 
tools	 to	 help	 the	 user	 find	 meaning	 and	 relationships	
at the collection level. This is done in THDL mainly 
through post-processing	 a	 query’s	 returns,	 presenting	
and analyzing them as a whole. 
Post-Query	Classification
Figure 2 is an example of how query results are present-
ed in THDL. After the query results (the sub-collection) 
are	 returned,	THDL	 classifies	 the	 resulting	 land	 deeds	
according	 to	 three	predefined	dimensions	(year,	origin,	
and type) on the left of the web page, while presenting 
summaries of the land deeds themselves on the right. 
Each class is followed by the size of the class (Fig. 3). 
By	 representing	 post-query	 classification,	 the	 historian	
can observe the distribution and behavior of the sub-
collection, and see if there is anything that  contradicts 
what	the	historian	predicts.	At	a	first	glimpse,	the	histo-
rian can quickly capture the outline of the sub-collection. 
It’s	helpful	especially	when	the	query	results	of	full-text	
search is too large to manage. Furthermore, the post-
query	classification	can	also	be	used	as	a	faceted	search:	
simply	click	on	a	class	will	refine	the	user’s	query.	
Note that the three dimensions are chosen because they 
are important characteristics of land deeds. A different 
corpus	could	define	a	completely	different	set	of	dimen-
sions	to	reflect	the	characteristics	of	the	content.	
Fig. 2  An outline of THDL right after a query
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 88
Fig. 3  Post-query classification according to year, origin, 
and type of land deeds
Line Chart of Temporal Distribution
The	post-query	classification	on	year	 reviews	 the	 tem-
poral distribution of a sub-collection. To better visualize 
the	 temporal	distribution	of	a	query’s	 returns,	we	have	
built a tool to draw a line chart for any given query. It is 
especially useful when comparing the temporal distribu-
tions of two queries at a same time. For example, when a 
historian suspects that there is dependency between two 
concepts and wants more analysis, she can simply input 
each concept as a query, and then get a line chart (Fig. 
4). The line chart of Fig 4. suggests that the two concepts 
are quite correlated. 
Fig. 4  The temporal distribution of two queries
Term Frequency Analysis 
We have developed a term extraction method for extract-
ing noun phrases from old Chinese text (Chang 2006). 
In the land deed corpus, we have successfully extracted 
40,000 names of people and 7,000 names of locations 
from metadata records and from full text (Chang, 2006). 
THDL uses the names to provide term frequency analy-
sis by calculating the numbers of times each name ap-
pears in the sub-collection and representing the result in 
tables alongside the full text of resulting land deeds (Fig. 
5). The names are listed in descending order according to 
their document frequency (DF, the number of documents 
in which a name appears). The user can use the tables to 
observe the relevance among locations and people in the 
sub-collection. Fig. 5 shows the returns of the query “Jin 
Guang Cheng” (金廣成), a local reclamation coopera-
tive in the Guanxi (關西) area.  At a closer look at the 
tables of names (Fig. 6) shows that the people on top 
are indeed the major shareholders of Jin Guang Cheng. 
Similarly, the locations on top are exactly the locations 
where Jin Guang Cheng claimed lands back to 1880s. 
However, the person with the highest DF only appears 
in 38 documents, while the size of the sub-collection is 
61, showing that none of the people appear dominantly 
in the sub-collection. On the contrary, the locations with 
the highest DF, “Shiliao Zhuang” (十寮庄) and “Zhubei 
Er Bao” (竹北二保), appear in 57 and 56 documents ac-
cordingly, showing the lands Jin Quang Cheng claimed 
were mostly around the same area. 
Fig. 5  An outline of THDL when representing the term 
frequency analysis facility
Fig. 6  The tables of names 
Relation Graphs and Role Analysis
Each land deed should, in principle, include all the attri-
butes we mentioned earlier in the paper.  It is thus desir-
able to extract them so that analysis can be done more 
easily.  We have developed an XML format and have 
already extracted and analyzed about 13,000 of these 
deeds (with the attributes of such land deed represented 
as	an	XML	file).	Fig.	7	shows	an	example	of	these	XML	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  89
files.	
We have also developed a way to show the inter-rela-
tionship	of	the	XML	files	via	a	notion	of	relation	graphs.	
These graphs have been used to conduct role analysis, 
which	shows	how	a	specific	person,	family,	or	coopera-
tive is involved in the development of a certain region 
through time. It is done by unfolding the roles they 
played in land deeds. For example, Fig 8. shows the role 
analysis of “Lin Benyuan” (林本源), a cooperative that 
the well-known Lin family of northern Taiwan set up to 
represent the family in land acquisition. We found that 
most of the land deeds involving Lin Benyuan in our col-
lection	are	sales	of	lands	or	certificates	of	lands	from	the	
government. Furthermore, Lin Benyuan was the buyer 
in	all	the	sales	and	was	the	landowners	in	all	the	certifi-
cates. This observation matches the general impression 
of the Lin family, which has been one of the wealthiest 
families in Taiwan since late 19th century till now. The 
timeline of the deeds also shows that they focused on 
(and systematically) acquiring lands from one geograph-
ic location before moving on to the next.
Fig. 7  The XML format for representing attributes in land 
deeds
Fig. 8  The role analysis result for querying “Lin 
Benyuan”
Other Facilities to Assist Research
We have also built other facilities to assist research. 
THDL allows users to bookmark documents and thus 
create their own sub-collections. Moreover, users can 
manipulate sub-collections by applying three set opera-
tions – union, intersection, and complement – on sub-
collections and save the result as a sub-collection (Tu, 
1998).	This	facility	enables	the	user	to	adjust	a	query’s	
returns by adding or removing designated documents, or 
documents from another sub-collection. THDL automat-
ically calculates the similarity between documents and 
reports to user when there are documents similar to the 
present	one.	The	user	can	check	if	it’s	a	duplicate	land	
deed or a copy. For reading assistance, THDL provides 
the facility highlights query terms and user-designated 
keywords. This facility can help the user to quickly iden-
tify keywords of interests when reading, and thus can 
help quick evaluation of relevance. 
Concluding Remarks
In this paper we described the land deed portion of THDL 
(Taiwan History Digital Library) that we build with the 
goal of providing a research environment with primary 
documents in full-text for research in Taiwanese history. 
We have developed a concept of regarding query results 
as a sub-collection, and have built tools that help users 
observe the relationship and collective meaning of a set 
of documents.  On the aspect of land deeds, we have no-
ticed that most of the existing research in Taiwan on this 
subject had used no more than a few old deeds (often 
within a hundred).  It would be interesting to see, with 
over 20,000 land deeds available in searchable full-text 
and with tools to help discovering and analyzing their re-
lationship, what kind of research issues can emerge and 
what kind of observations can be made. 
Notes
1This	estimation,	however,	could	be	significantly	lower	
than the real number.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the National Taic-
hung Library for their effort in producing the full text 
of many of the land deeds mentioned in this article; the 
Council of Cultural Affairs of Taiwan for authorizing 
the inclusion of those deeds into our system; the staff of 
the Special Collections Division of the National Taiwan 
University Library in producing the full text of their col-
lection and for further checking the typing correctness of 
all the deeds; Professors Wu Micha and Lee Wen-Liang 
of the Department of History of NTU for their continu-
ing support; the members of the Lab of Digital Archives 
and Automated Reasoning of the Department of Com-
puter Science of NTU for producing many of the tools 
mentioned here; and the staff of the Research Center for 
Digital Humanities for their general support.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 90
References
Chang, S.P. (2006). A Word-Clip Algorithm for Named 
Entity Recognition: by Example of Historical Docu-
ments. Master Thesis. National Taiwan University.
Chen, S.P., Hsiang, J., Tu, H.C., and Wu, M.C. (2007). 
On Building a Full-Text Digital Library of Historical 
Documents. In: Dion Hoe Lian Goh, Tru Hoang Cao, 
Ingeborg SÃ¸lvberg, Edie Rasmussen (Eds.), 10th Inter-
national Conference on Asian Digital Libraries (ICADL 
2007): Asian Digital Libraries. Looking Back 10 Years 
and Forging New Frontiers. Hanoi, Vietnam, December 
10-13, 2007. New York: Springer Berlin, pp. 49-60.
Hong, L.W. (2005). A Study of Aboriginal Contractual 
Behavior and the Relationship between Aborigines and 
Han Immigrants in West-Central Taiwan. Vol. 1. Taiwan: 
Taichung County Cultural Center, pp. 5.
Tu, H.C. (1998). Interactive Web IR: Focalization Mod-
el, Effectiveness Measures, and Experiments. Ph. D. Dis-
sertation. National Taiwan University.
Wu, M.C., Ang K.I., Lee, W.L., and Lin, H.Y. (2004). 
A Brief Introduction to the Integrated Collections of 
Taiwan-related Historical Records. Taiwan: CCA and 
Yuan-Liou Publishing, pp. 101.
Wang, S.C. (1977). Taiwanese Historical Documents in 
Private Holdings. Taipei: Huanqiu Publishing.
Wang, S.C. (1993). Introducing Historical Documents of 
Taiwan: Government Archives, Old Documents, and Ge-
nealogies. In: Yan-xian Zhang and Mei-rong Chen eds. 
Taiwan History and Historical Documents of Taiwan. 
Taipei: Zili Evening News Publishing, 
Wang, S.C. (2004). Papers of Taiwan Historical Docu-
ments, Volume 1. Taipei: Daw Shiang Publishing, pp. 
375-376. 
