Our Americas Archives 
Partnership: Charting New 
Cultural Geographies 
Lisa Spiro 
Rice University 
lspiro@rice.edu
Over the last decade, Hemispheric American Stud-ies	 has	 been	 an	 emerging	 interdisciplinary	 field,	
spawning new conferences, graduate programs, profes-
sional seminars, journals, essay collections, and even a 
scholarly association.  As Caroline Levander (co-PI of 
the Our Americas Partnership) and Robert Levine ex-
plain, Hemispheric American Studies aims “to chart new 
literary and cultural geographies by decentering the U.S. 
nation and excavating the intricate and complex politics, 
histories, and discourses of spatial encounter that occur 
throughout the hemisphere but tend to be obscured in 
U.S. nation-based inquiries” (Levander & Levine 2008, 
p.5).  Such an approach means being attentive to shifting 
borders, migrations, cultural interactions—movement 
rather	than	fixity.			
Scholars practicing a hemispheric approach to American 
Studies face challenges that include research materials 
being scattered in many repositories, lack of institutional 
support and intellectual community at their home institu-
tions, and linguistic barriers.  The Our America Archive 
Partnership (OAAP, http://oaap.rice.edu/) is beginning 
to address these limitations by building a distributed 
online collection of research materials as well as tech-
nologies for federating multiple repositories, creating 
geographical and temporal visualizations, and enabling 
researchers to tag and collect digital objects.  Funded by 
a $1 million grant from the Institute for Museum and 
Library Services (IMLS), OAAP brings together Rice 
University’s	 Fondren	 Library,	 Rice’s	 Humanities	 Re-
search	Center,	the	University	of	Maryland’s	Institute	for	
Technology	and	the	Humanities	(MITH),	and	Mexico’s	
Instituto Mora, with more partners expected.  Included 
in the OAAP project are evaluation of scholarly needs; 
digitization of texts; development of an open federated 
archive; and design and implementation of technologies 
that support inquiry, discovery and collaboration.
The Archive 
With its transnational scope, Hemispheric American 
Studies requires access to research materials distributed 
around the world, with collections that transcend na-
tion state boundaries and facilitate comparativist studies 
of the Americas. The web-based OAAP provides such 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  261
access, with tools that enable scholars to search for re-
sources, collect and organize them, visualize them using 
temporal and geospatial interfaces, and collaborate with 
peers.  OAAP brings together an existing collection of 
TEI-encoded	 texts,	 the	University	of	Maryland’s	Early	
Americas Digital Archive (EADA, which covers litera-
ture of the Americas from 1492-1820), with two new col-
lections	being	digitized,	Rice’s	America’s	Collection	and	
Instituto	Mora’s	 collection	 (North	 and	Latin	American	
government documents, manuscripts, books, and other 
material from 1811-1920). The combined collections 
span	 the	 five	 hundred	 year	 period	 that	 witnessed	 the	
making of colonial and modern cultures in the Americas. 
Because of its range, the federated archive promises to 
reinvigorate the study of American literary and cultural 
history by suggesting unexpected juxtapositions, differ-
ent models of periodization, and new avenues of cross-
cultural	influence.1
User Studies and Needs Analysis. 
The OAAP team is working actively with the Hemi-
spheric American Studies scholarly community in as-
sessing needs, building the collection and tools, and 
developing an infrastructure for collaboration. Caroline 
Levander, a leading researcher in Hemispheric Ameri-
can	Studies,	is	a	co-PI,	and	Rice’s	Humanities	Research	
Center, which Levander directs, contributes most of the 
scholarly activities for the project.  The advisory board 
includes well-respected scholars, librarians, and digital 
humanists. Levander has taught an NEH Summer Semi-
nar on the topic of hemispheric American literature and 
a National Humanities Center Dupont seminar on the 
globalization of American literary studies.  Participants 
were surveyed about their existing use of digital resourc-
es as well as about the OAAP and will be consulted as 
OAAP continues to evolve.  We also collaborated with 
the Council on Library and Information Resources to 
convene	 a	meeting	 of	 five	 scholars	 and	 one	 academic	
technologist	to	envision	OAAP’s	future.
From these surveys and discussions several principles 
have emerged:
• Access is paramount.
Seminar survey respondents ranked better search 
tools and better access to research materials as top 
priorities.  Researchers emphasized the importance 
of having access to a variety of materials from 
around the world, from government documents to 
manuscript materials to audio recordings.  These re-
sources must be easy to discover through full-text 
search as well as rich metadata.
• OAAP should tackle barriers of language and dis-
cipline
How can scholars get beyond the limitations of their 
own conceptual schemas and their own languages? 
One scholar envisioned a search tool that would 
work like a friendly archivist, identifying materials 
you	didn’t	know	existed.		Scholars	emphasized	the	
need for a multilingual search interface, so that a 
researcher could enter keywords in Spanish and pull 
up relevant results in English.
• Scholars want an environment that facilitates col-
laboration, acknowledges contributors, and enables 
them to quickly evaluate the reliability of resources.
Fundamentally scholars saw OAAP as opening a 
new approach to scholarship, one that is not con-
strained to close readings of a few key texts but able 
to encompass broad spatial, political, and social 
contexts.  For instance, a group of scholars could 
team up on a study of the Spanish-American War, 
some focusing on visual or literary culture, some on 
demography.  One survey respondent suggested that 
OAAP “develop [a] place for scholars to ask one 
another questions about materials with which they 
are less familiar, i.e. provide space for collaborative 
interactions/project.” 
Text Encoding Approach
Texts	from	OAAP’s	collections	are	marked	up	in	TEI	to	
facilitate scholarly analysis and long-term preservation. 
Since scholars seem to value access over all else, some 
have	suggested	that	it	would	be	sufficient	to	offer	PDFs	
of the books. With TEI marked-up texts, however, schol-
ars can search within or across texts, use analytical tools 
such as TAPOR, and easily copy out passages into their 
notes.  Moreover, TEI supports the creation of multiple 
forms of output from a single TEI text, such as an origi-
nal and a regularized version of a manuscript or a version 
optimized for mobile devices. 
After consultation with scholars, OAAP decided to focus 
on marking up basic structures in the body of the text, 
just as EADA did with its TEI texts.  Our aim is to sup-
port access and analysis, not to create critical editions. 
For manuscripts, we are also encoding features such as 
deletions, additions, and corrections, as well as the struc-
ture of letters such as openers and closers. 
Given	the	significance	of	geography	to	OAAP,	we	con-
sidered using automated or manual methods to add place 
markup.  While this could enable geospatial searching 
or the generation of maps showing places described in a 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 262
text, it would not describe the complexities of place, such 
as the distinctions between places in which a narrator is 
physically present vs. imagined spaces (like “home”). 
We needed a streamlined approach that would minimize 
labor costs in working with the 25,000 pages of digitized 
text. Furthermore, to encourage other institutions to add 
their collections to the federation, we want to keep the 
requirements for participating in OAAP minimal.  We 
must, therefore, pursue a balanced approach that em-
braces standards (to facilitate consistency and longevity) 
and	is	flexible	enough	to	accommodate	a	diversity	of	ar-
chives with a range of goals and capabilities. 
Federation Model and User Interface
In addition to providing access to key research materi-
als, OAAP hopes to facilitate collaboration among an in-
ternational community of scholars.  Despite challenges, 
including	 the	 humanities’	 reluctance	 to	 reward	 collab-
orative work, scholars in this vital community have ex-
pressed excitement about working together on research 
projects in the collaborative space provided by the OAAP. 
The project is facilitating collaboration through a social 
tagging interface and federation of distributed reposito-
ries, as well as by working actively with scholars on the 
OAAP’s	development.		To	enable	the	federation	of	dis-
tributed repositories, OAAP is implementing a harvester 
that collects objects from repositories meeting minimal 
standards and stores them for the purposes of searching 
and display.  OAAP is adopting a data exchange standard 
based	upon	OAI’s	Static	Repository	XML	model	(http://
www.openarchives.org/OAI/2.0/guidelines-static-repos-
itory.htm).	Through	OAAP’s	interface,	researchers	will	
be able to search, browse, tag, and collect objects from 
distributed collections.  Researchers will tag objects to 
create a set of keywords that others can use, thus expand-
ing the metadata beyond the Library of Congress Subject 
Headings added by metadata librarians and OAAP key-
words provided by participating scholars.  OAAP will 
also implement faceted browsing, allowing researchers 
to	filter	searches	by,	for	instance,	“political	constitution”	
and “1800-1850.”  Since notions of time and space are 
crucial to OAAP, it will provide both geospatial and tem-
poral interfaces, enabling researchers to view resources 
on an interactive map or timeline. 
Conclusion
By providing open access to core research materials, 
federating archives, and developing tools for analysis 
and collaboration, OAAP hopes to realize what Cathy 
Davidson calls Humanities 2.0:  “Hybridity, exchange, 
flow,	and	cultural	 transaction	are	all	ex plored more re-
sponsibly and adventurously when the resources of 
many nations, in many languages, have been digitized, 
made interop erable, and offered for research by scholars 
around the world, each of whom brings a local store of 
knowledge and experience to the theoretical, interpretive 
enterprise” (Davidson 2008).
References
Davidson, C.N., 2008. Humanities 2.0: Promise, 
Perils, Predictions. PMLA, 123(3), 707-717. Avail-
able at: http://www.mlajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1632/
pmla.2008.123.3.707 [Accessed October 5, 2008].
Levander, C.F. & Levine, R.S., 2008. Introduction. 
Hemispheric American studies, New Brunswick, N.J.: 
Rutgers University Press, pp. 1-17.
1See Our Americas Archive Partnership Narrative, 
http://oaap.rice.edu/documentation.html
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  263
