Patrick Kavanagh’s Poetic 
Wordscapes: GIS, Literature 
and Ireland, 1922-1949
Dr. Charles Travis 
Trinity College  
ctravis@tcd.ie
Somebody is moving across the headlands
Talking to himself
A grey thinker.
       The Seed and the Soil (1938)
a road, a mile of kingdom. I am king 
Of banks and stones and every blooming thing.
       Inniskeen Road: July Evening’ (1935)
This paper presents the use of Geographical Informa-tion Systems (GIS)  as a means to digitally explore 
authorial, literary and historical environments from a 
multi-sensory perspective.  The production of  Patrick 
Kavanagh’s Poetic Wordscapes  has involved the  digiti-
zation  and literary mapping of historical  1902 Ordnance 
Survey maps of Inniskeen parish in County Monaghan, 
Ireland, and  the townlands of Mucker and Shancoduff. 
This regional landscape captured in the writings of Irish 
poet-farmer Patrick Kavanagh (1904-1967) comprised 
an imaginative hinterland which he observed, inspired 
many of his works:  
A gap in a hedge, a smooth rock surfacing a narrow lane, 
a view of a woody meadow, the stream at the junction of 
four	small	fields	–these	are	as	much	as	a	man	can	 fully	
experience. As I wander slowly along the over-hanging 
hedge	 that	 separates	 my	 fields	 from	 the	 fields	 of	 John	
Woods my past life comes vividly alive in my imagina-
tion. Those wonderful days in a world that was only a 
couple of townlands and yet was eternal. 1
The GIS visualizations and interactive mappings which 
comprise Patrick Kavanagh’s Poetic Wordscapes work 
are the fruit of  an interdisciplinary collaboration be-
tween the Digital Humanities, Historical Cartography 
and Geography and Irish Literary Studies.  Humanist 
geographers have observed that ‘literature is the prod-
uct of perception, or, more simply, is perception,’2  and 
long maintained a ‘view of literature as a valuable store-
house	of	vivid	depictions	of	landscapes	and	life.’3 Cor-
respondingly	 ‘Robert	 Frost’s	New	England,	Gauguin’s	
Tahiti,	Hemingway’s	Spain	[.	.	.	]	are	imaginary	places	in	
the	original	sense	of	the	verb	“to	image.”’4		Kavanagh’s	
literary landscape of Monaghan was both imagistic and 
strongly	rooted	in	a	farmer’s	physical	relationship	with	
the land itself. As  the humanistic geographer Yi-Fu Tuan 
informs us:
the entry of nature is no mere metaphor. Muscles and 
scars bear witness to the physical intimacy of the contact. 
The	 farmer’s	 topophilia	 is	 compounded	of	 this	physical	
intimacy, or the material dependence and the fact that the 
land is a repository of memory and sustains hope.5
Landscape	depictions	in		Kavanagh’s	poetry	and	prose	of	
the	1920s,	1930s	and	1940s		deeply	reflects	such	a	topo-
graphical sensibility.  In later life Kavanagh observed: 
‘To	know	fully	even	one	field	or	one	lane	is	a	lifetime’s	
experience. In the world of poetic experience it is depth 
that	counts,	not	width.’6  The vivid images of place in 
Kavanagh’s	canon	originate	from	the	early	memories	he	
possessed of his birth place in the townland of Mucker. 
One established, they circle outward to encompass the 
fields	of	Shancoduff	and	wider	drumlin	 landscapes	be-
yond, like ripples extending outward upon a pond of po-
etic	imagination.		Kavanagh’s	prose	style		is	particularly	
suited to GIS visualization and mapping  as it inherits the 
‘Gaelic bardic tradition of  dinnsheanchas (knowledge 
of the lore of places)7	 	and	accordingly	reflects	an	inti-
mate ‘geography based on seanchas, in which there is no 
clear distinction between the general principles of topog-
raphy	or	direction-finding	and	the	intimate	knowledge	of	
particular	places.’8  The base maps utilized in this project 
are based upon  1902 revisions of surveys conducted by 
the	British	Ordnance	Survey,	which		first	mapped	the	is-
land of Ireland between 1824 and 1842  and produced 
baseline six inch to one mile maps (1:10,560) chart-
ing	the	locations	of	structures,	townlands,	fields,	roads,	
streams, as well as Anglicizing Gaelic place names. 
Whilst	topographically	accurate,	the	first	ordnance	sur-
vey in the nineteenth century was a political project of 
empire and its intent was to create a scale of appraisal, 
which	would	establish	the	basis	for	Griffith’s	Valuation	
of land and property. The 1902 revision maps digitized 
to	visualize	the	landscapes	depicted	in	Kavanagh’s	prose	
are linked to the  basic topographical divisions of  the 
1901 and 1911 censuses: county; district electoral di-
vision; townland or street. Original household returns, 
signed by heads of households,  provide a window on 
the social-economic features of the landscape through 
three statistical returns, dealing with religious denomi-
nations,	 classification	of	buildings,	 and	out-offices	and	
farm-steadings. Such an approach has been utilized by 
Woods and Shelton (1997) in their investigation of the 
geographical patterns of mortality rates in nineteenth 
century England and Wales.9  The  mapping revisions 
published in 1902 and joined with databases containing 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 286
data from the 1901 and 1911 censuses are commensurate 
and	reflective	of	boundaries	and	topographical	features	
described	by	Kavanagh’s	account	of	the	social	landscape	
in	 the	first	 two	 and	half	 decades	 of	 the	 twentieth	 cen-
tury.  Utilizing overlayering techniques, these attributes 
in a GIS system have been geo-coded to features such as 
boundary lines and structural points, to reconstruct the 
historical dimensions of particular periods and locations 
upon the visualized landscape. Digitized maps for Ka-
vanagh’s Wordscapes were	 ‘rubbersheeted’	 and	draped	
over a digital terrain model (DEM) created from contem-
porary geological survey satellite images of the region. 
Such	an	approach	in	digital	mapping	recreates	the	poet’s	
visual perspective and movements over a rural drumlin 
landscape.	Selections	from	Kavanagh’s		poetry	and	prose	
have been geocoded in real-time, through GPS technol-
ogy in text and audio from point  to point of inspiration 
and provide a 3D model, which recreates his poetic per-
formance		through	space,	as	he	farmed	his	fields,	walked	
the winding  roads of his townland, and participated in 
the day-to-day life of his Parish of Inniskeen. A similar 
technique allowed Harris (200) to employ moving imag-
ery	to	research	the	loci	of	‘sacred	space’	associated	with	
ancient native American burial grounds in Moundsville, 
West Virginia.10 The digital interactive maps comprising 
Kavanagh’s Wordscape  are  but one element of an online 
literary geography which explores the intrinsic relation-
ship	 between	 Irish	 literature	 and	 place	 during	 the	 first	
half of the twentieth century, and are currently being em-
ployed in an ongoing digital humanities project, entitled 
A Digital Literary Atlas of Ireland, 1922-1949  to visual-
ize the historic, imaginative and literary landscapes of a 
selections of Irish authors, by integrating their perfor-
mances as writers in time and space, with the narrato-
logical maps provided by their texts.  Though many web 
based portals in the digital humanities consist of online 
databases, directories, or repositories of scanned text, 
this	 project’s	 nexus	between	 Irish	Studies	 and	Histori-
cal GIS is thematically different and methodologically a 
strong one,11	because	GIS’s	ability	to	visualize	and	store	
attribute, spatial and temporal information, allows the 
integration of visual, textual and numerical data related 
to Irish Studies within a spatial frame of reference. This 
project provides a means for users to visualize the unique 
relationship	between	writers,	their	works	and	the	influ-
ence	of	place,	history	and	culture	upon	Ireland’s	literary	
production in the early twentieth century. The project 
question being posed, presented and facilitated by GIS is 
to undercover through the aegis of writers, their locales 
and their works the heterogeneous nature of Irish iden-
tity and its relation to place during the early twentieth 
century.  As Irish poet and Nobel prize winner Seamus 
Heaney has observed:
The usual assumption, when we speak of writers and 
place, is that the writer stands in some directly expres-
sive or interpretative relationship to the milieu. He or she 
becomes a voice of the spirit of the region. The writing is 
infused with the atmosphere, physical and emotional, or a 
certain	landscape	or	seascape,	and	while	the	writer’s	im-
mediate purpose may not have any direct bearing upon the 
regional or national background, the background is sensed 
as a distinctive element in the work.12
Each	selected	writer’s	regional	 landscape	offers	a	win-
dow into the plurality of Irish culture, whether or not this 
was	 reflected	politically	 during	 the	 period	 in	 question.	
The underlying aim of the project is to provide a re-ex-
amination of disciplinary conventions and orthodoxies, 
provoke research questions and foster public and aca-
demic discourse. 
Notes
1Patrick Kavanagh,  Patrick Kavanagh: Man and Poet, 
(ed.) Peter Kavanagh, (Maine: National Poetry Founda-
tion, University of Maine at Orono, 1986)  p. 15
2Douglas C.  Pocock, Humanistic Geography and Liter-
ature: Essays on the Experience of Place, (New Jersey: 
Barnes & Noble Books, 1981)  p. 15.
3D.	W.	Meinig,	 ‘Geography	 as	 an	 art’,	Trans. Inst. Br. 
Geogr. N.S. (1983) 316.
4Marwyn S. Samuels, ‘The Biography of Landscape: 
cause	 and	Culpability’,	D.W.	Meinig,	 (Ed.)	The Inter-
pretation of Ordinary Landscapes  (NY/Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1979)  p. 70.
5Y.F. Tuan, Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Per-
ception, Attitudes, and Values, (Englewood Cliffs: Pren-
tice-Hall, 1974) p. 97.
6Patrick Kavanagh, Patrick Kavanagh, 15.
7Declan Kiberd, Inventing Ireland, (London: Vintage, 
1997)  p. 107.
8Charles Bowen, ‘A Historical Inventory of the Dindsh-
enchas,’ in  Studia Celtica 10/11, (1975/76) p. 115.
9R. Woods  and  N. Shelton,  An Atlas of Victorian Mor-
tality  (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1997)
10T. M. Harris, ‘Moving GIS: exploring movement in 
prehistoric	cultural	landscapes	using	GIS’	in	G.R.	Lock	
(ed.) Beyond the Map: Archaeology and Spatial Tech-
nologies. (Oxford: IOS Press,  2000) pp. 116-23.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  287
11An increased spatial emphasis is a recent development 
in	 the	 	field	of	 Irish	Studies	and	conversely,	historians	
and other researchers in the humanities have begun to in-
corporate  the visual and analytical technology  provided 
by GIS in their studies.  In regards to Irish Studies,  Pat-
rick	Duffy’s	Exploring the History and Heritage of Irish 
Landscapes (Four Courts Press: 2007) surveys in part 
how literary and  artistic representations of the environ-
ment can provide insights into ‘imagined worlds of the 
past.’	Tim	Robinson’s	Connemara: Listening to the Wind 
(Penguin Ireland: 2006) explores  environmental, cultur-
al and historical dimensions of  this Atlantic county by 
conducting a series of hermeneutic readings of  natural 
and human history within the context of contemplative 
fieldwork.	Andrew	Kincaid’s	Postcolonial Dublin: Im-
perial Legacies and the Built Environment (University 
of Minnesota Press: 2006)  investigates the relationship 
between ideology and  material culture in the develop-
ment of twentieth century Irish social and political iden-
tity, and Liam Kennedy,  Paul S. Ell, E.M. Crawford 
and	L.A.	Clarkson’s	Mapping The Great Irish Famine: 
A Survey of the Famine Decades (Dublin Four Courts 
Press: 1999) incorporates  Historical GIS to analyze and 
visualize various social landscapes of Ireland during 
the Famine years of the nineteenth century. The latter 
title	 	 is	 emblematic	of	 the	emerging	field	of	Historical	
GIS which incorporates the study of history and culture 
within a spatial perspective.  Major research projects in 
this	growing	field		are		illustrated	by		online	portals	such	
as  the  The Salem Witch Trials Archive and The Valley 
of the Shadow Project hosted by the University of Vir-
ginia’s	Center	 for	Digital	History,	 	The China Histori-
cal GIS  hosted by the Center for Geographic Analysis 
at Harvard University, The Historical Atlas of Canada 
Online Learning Project hosted by the Department of 
Geography at the University of Toronto, and the Great 
Britain Historical GIS hosted by the Department of Ge-
ography at Portsmouth University. These projects serve 
as interactive online portals, which can be accessed by 
interested scholars, educators and the general public.
12Seamus Heaney, the Place of Writing (Atlanta, Geor-
gia: Scholars Press, 1989) pgs. 20-21.
