Patterns in Style Evolution of 
Poets
Vadim Sergeevich Andreev 
Smolensk State University 
smol.an@mail.ru
Quantitative studies of the evolution of style (‘stylo-chronometry’)	have	revealed	systematic	changes	in	
the features (syntactic, morphological, lexical, etc.) of 
texts	 of	 the	 same	 author	 over	 time	 (Goldfield,	Hoover	
2008;	Juola	2008;	Stamou	2008).	These	findings	stimu-
late further research aimed at detection of the individual 
and universal markers of style evolution of different au-
thors and, on the other hand, integral features, ensuring 
style	contiguity,	at	establishing	factors	which	influence	
style development in different genres and other issues.
The aim of this presentation is to address some of the 
above-mentioned problems on the material of verse: to 
find	out	the	pattern	of	the	evolution	of	the	style	of	Ameri-
can romantic poet H.W. Longfellow and to compare it to 
the development of the style of another famous romantic 
poet	E.A.Poe.	Poe’s	style	evolution	was	analyzed	in	our	
previous research (Andreev 2008). 
Choosing the material for the study we tried to meet the 
requirements for the research in stylometry (Rudman 
2003). Texts which were selected for our analysis were 
of the same genre and comparable in size – iambic lyrics 
not exceeding 65 lines. We analyzed the poems which 
the authors themselves included into their collections 
of	works	due	to	which	they	reflect	the	authors’	subcon-
scious stylistic preferences. The possibility of serious 
editorial interventions or any other unauthorized altera-
tions is reduced to the minimum. 
In stylochronometric research the feature set, used by 
different scholars, varies considerably (Juola 2008; 
Stamou 2008). In our study we use 29 characteristics 
which were selected as a result of a number of experi-
ments. They include 10 morphological and 19 syntac-
tic	 features.	 Morphological	 characteristics	 reflect	 the	
frequency of different morphological classes of words 
(noun,	verb,	adjective,	adverb	and	pronoun)	in	the	first	
and	final	strong	(predominantly	stressed)	syllabic	posi-
tions – ictuses. Most syntactic characteristics are based 
on the traditional notions of the members of the sentence 
(subject,	predicate,	object,	adverbial	modifier)	in	the	first	
and	the	final	strong	positions	in	the	lines.	Other	syntactic	
parameters are the number of clauses in (a) complex and 
(b) compound sentences, inversions (a) complete (inver-
sion of the subject or predicate) and (b) partial (inversion 
of the other members of the sentence), lines divided by 
syntactic pauses, enjambements (absence of syntactical 
pause between the lines) and lines ending in exclamation 
or question marks. 
The creative life of Longfellow in our study is divided 
into	three	periods:	early,	middle	and	final.	In	order	to	de-
termine the borderlines between the periods biographical 
data	was	used.	The	first	period	embraces	the	years	of	his	
youth (1819 to 1825) till Longfellow started his working 
career. During this period Longfellow wrote lyrics which 
he later included into his two collections Earlier Poems, 
Juvenile Poems. The beginning of the last period is 
marked by the Civil War, which according to the major-
ity of critics became a turning point in the development 
of American romanticism. This period is represented by 
his collections Flower-de-Luce and Ultima Thule. The 
remaining	 part	 of	 Longfellow’s	 creative	 career	 consti-
tutes the second period (collections Voices of the Night, 
Ballads and Other Poems, Poems on Slavery, The Bel-
fry of Bruges and Other Poems and The Seaside and the 
Fireside).
To establish parameters differentiating the texts of the 
above-mentioned three periods and to estimate their 
discriminant force multivariate discriminant analysis 
was used (Warner 2008: 650-701). The results of this 
analysis show that there are substantial and systematic 
alterations in the style of Longfellow over time. Out of 
29 characteristics 15 were found to possess discriminant 
force, the most relevant being the number of subordi-
nate clauses, enjambements, lines divided by syntactic 
pauses, inversions and the number of nouns, verbs and 
adjectives in the initial strong position in the line. Post 
hoc	success	classification	rate	is	nearly	97%.
Since the second period is longer than the other two we 
tested	 whether	 this	 can	 influence	 the	 results	 (Rybicki	
2008). During this experiment instead of all texts, be-
longing to Period 2, a 50% random sample of the texts 
was investigated, while the remaining poems were used 
as a control group for a cross-validation test. 
This additional experiment gave very similar results re-
vealing	 the	 same	 pattern	 in	 the	 poet’s	 style	 evolution.	
Success	classification	rate	now	was	90%	and	the	cross-
validation test yielded 64,70% of correct period predic-
tion, which is two times higher than chance level. Such 
results can be considered as acceptable (Juola 2008, 288-
291).
Earlier lyrics by Longfellow (Period 1) are characterized 
by frequent use of subordinate clauses, adjectives in the 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  53
initial part of a line, inversions and enjambements. The 
following example is a typical stanza of young Longfel-
low’s	poems:
     When the bright sunset fills, 
The silver woods with light, the green slope throws  
Its shadows in the hollows of the hills, 
     And wide the upland glows. 
  (An April Day)
The second period is characterized by fewer subordinate 
clauses, enjambements and inversions. In the initial part 
of	the	line	verbs	become	more	frequent.	In	the	final	posi-
tion of the line the growth of the number of words in the 
syntactic function of attribute is observed. Some of these 
changes can be illustrated by the following example:
A new Prometheus, chained upon the rock, 
     Still grasping in his hand the fire of Jove, 
It does not hear the cry, nor heed the shock, 
     But hails the mariner with words of love. 
  (The Lighthouse)
The third period is marked by further decrease in the 
use of subordinate clauses and the growth of the number 
of enjambements, partial inversions and lines divided 
with	syntactic	pauses.	The	number	of	verbs	 in	 the	first	
stressed position decreases and the number of nouns in-
creases.	Many	features	of	the	poet’s	style	resemble	those	
of his earliest poems: 
The wind blows, and uplifts thy drooping banner, 
And round thee throng and run 
The rushes, the green yeomen of thy manor, 
The outlaws of the sun. 
  (Flower-de-Luce)
As we see, morphological characteristics of the end of 
the line are the most stable. On the contrary, there is a 
clearly	marked	 change	 in	 the	 author’s	 use	 of	morpho-
logical classes of words in the initial strong position: ad-
jectives	in	the	first	period	–	verbs	in	the	second	period	
– nouns in the third one. Syntactic features, which make 
verse more complex and expressive, such as enjambe-
ment, syntactic pauses in the lines and inversions, are 
frequent	during	 the	first	period,	 then	 there	 is	a	drop	 in	
their use during the second period and at the end of his 
life the author resumes their frequent use. 
The comparison of style evolution of such different po-
ets as Longfellow and Poe reveals not only differences 
but, quite unexpectedly, certain similar tendencies, too. 
Major differences can be summed up as follows:
•	 in	Poe’s	lyrics	morphological	characteristics	of	both	
initial	and	final	parts	of	the	line	change	over	time	–	
in	Longfellow’s	texts	the	end	of	the	line	is	stable;
•	 the increase of verse expressiveness at the level of 
syntax for Poe is a constant tendency and in case 
of Longfellow the frequency of expressive syntac-
tic characteristics decreases at the second stage and 
rises again in the third period.
Major similarities:  
Despite the fact that the poets belonged to different 
schools of American romanticism there are similar pat-
terns in their style development. 
•	 The number of subordinate clauses gradually re-
duces over time.
•	 The evolution of style of both poets was not rec-
tilinear: certain deviation from the initial syntactic 
pattern of verse line is observed during the middle 
period	of	their	creative	activities	and	then	at	the	final	
stage both authors resume, to a large extent, the use 
of the features, typical of their early lyrics.
References
Andreev V. (2008) Variation of Style: Diachronic Aspect. 
Digital Humanities 2008. Conference Abstracts: 42-43.
Goldfield	J.,	Hoover	D.L.	(2008)	Homebodies	and	Gad-
Abouts: A Chronological Stylistic Study of 19th Century 
French and English Novelists. Digital Humanities 2008. 
Conference Abstracts: 117-120.
Juola P. (2006) Authorship Attribution. Foundations and 
Trends in Information Retrieval. Vol. 1, No.3: 233-334.
Rudman J. (2003) Cherry Picking in Nontraditional Au-
thorship Attribution Studies. Chance, Vol.16, No. 2: 26-
32.
Rybicki J. (2008) Does Size Matter? A Re-examination 
of a Time-proven Method. Digital Humanities 2008. 
Conference Abstracts: 184.
Stamou C. (2008) Stylochronometry: Stylistic Develop-
ment, Sequence of Composition, and Relative Dating. 
Literary & Linguistic Computing, 23: 181–199.
Warner R.M. (2008) Applied Statistics. Los Angeles – 
London: Sage Publications, 2008.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 54
