PCA, Delta, JGAAP and Polish 
Poetry of the 16th and the 17th 
Centuries: Who Wrote the Dirty 
Stuff?
Maciej Eder 
Pedagogical University, Cracow, Poland 
maciejeder@ijp-pan.krakow.pl
Jan Rybicki
Pedagogical University, Cracow, Poland 
jkrybicki@gmail.com
Towards the end of the 16th century – at a time when theological disputes between Protestants and Catho-
lics	degenerated	into	open	and,	often,	bloody	conflicts	–	
Polish literature saw a curious phenomenon termed “the 
age of manuscripts:” for fear of religious repression from 
either side, authors preferred not to publish their works 
in print; instead, they left them in handwritten form. The 
texts then circulated in a variety of copies. Sooner or 
later, confusion had to set in: different manuscripts pre-
served to this day ascribe individual poems to different 
authors or simply list the texts as anonymous.
Thus, in the present state of knowledge on “the age of 
manuscripts,” we are dealing not only with a number of 
literary texts deprived of their authors, but also with a 
number of poets to whom not even a single poem can 
be reliably attributed. The history of literary studies on 
Polish Renaissance and Baroque poetry and the result-
ing scholarly editions show that the canon of almost 
every single poet has been changing considerably from 
scholar to scholar; some poems have been “reliably” at-
tributed to several poets at a time. Present-day literature 
of the subject even contains authors brought to life by the 
scholars themselves, as is the case with the “Anonymous 
Protestant” and the numerous attempts at combining him 
with various poets of the late 16th century.
Quite by chance, the fate of the Anonymous Protestant 
attribution case is associated with another and much 
more crucial attribution problem. It so happens that the 
same manuscript (National Library in Warsaw, Ms. BOZ 
1049) contains, several dozen pages further, a collection 
of	thirty-one	poems	signed	with	the	name	of	Mikołaj	Sęp	
Szarzyński,	one	of	Poland’s	most	eminent	poets,	the	au-
thor of dark metaphysical poems. Little is known of his 
life: he died young in 1581 and the rest is hypotheses. 
His entire attributed output amounts to little more than 
fifty	poems;	if	thirty	more	could	be	reliably	attributed	to	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  243
Szarzyński,	this	would	indeed	constitute	a	priceless	ad-
dition. The problem is that the thirty poems are all very 
vividly	erotic,	and,	as	such,	do	not	fit	the	established	if	
only hypothetical image of the existentialist sufferer.
In	 fact,	 Szarzyński’s	 heritage	 abounds	 in	 unsolved	 is-
sues. His only known collection of poems was printed 
20 years after his death; the manuscript containing the 
problematic texts dates back to when he was still alive; 
but,	since	no	confirmed	Szarzyński	manuscript	is	known,	
forensic handwriting evidence is unavailable. What is 
more, interspersed with the erotic poems are six non-
erotic	ones	of	undoubted	Szarzyński	authorship	and	 in	
his well-known mannerist style; also, they appear in the 
printed posthumous volume. 
Those	who	 adhere	 to	 the	 view	 that	 Szarzyński	 indeed	
penned the erotica point out that the heady mixture of 
the sacred and the profane was characteristic of John 
Donne and the other English Metaphysicals, undoubt-
edly	 Szarzyński’s	 mirror-images	 in	 both	 poetic	 tone	
and	significance	for	their	respective	national	literatures.	
Other researchers invented a spiritual breakthrough for 
Szarzyński:	after	a	period	of	light-hearted	erotica,	he	was	
supposed to decide to foreswear, in his own words, “the 
world’s	 enticing	 vanities”	 and	 to	 radically	 change	 his	
poetic diction. Their adversaries maintain that writing 
in two different poetic languages. The erotic poems are 
visibly	written	in	Renaissance	mode,	while	Szarzyński’s	
proven works (including the six found among the erot-
ica	 in	 the	manuscript)	bear	 significant	 traces	of	 a	 later	
mannerist paradigm. In this view, such a shift would be 
hardly probabile for an artist who died so young: at this 
rate,	Szarzyński	would	have	had	to	become	a	consum-
mate master while still in his early teens.
The dispute on the uncertain erotic poems has not abated 
since the discovery of the manuscript in 1891 and has 
involved	many	of	the	most	eminent	scholars	in	the	field;	
and yet the above-mentioned historical and literary ar-
guments have not been enough to settle the matter. At-
tributions based on rudimentary statistics of parts of 
speech, enjambments and word order (Wyderka 2002) 
or chi-square tests of word frequency (Fleischer 1988) 
have given equally ambiguous results. Also, since the 
difficulty	in	this	case	naturally	stems	from	the	small	size	
of the samples at our disposal (the erotic poems them-
selves only amount to some 2700 words), it was inter-
esting to see if more advanced statistical methods could 
help solve this most eminent and fundamental problem 
in authorship attribution in Polish literature. 
Although no other candidates had ever been proposed, 
our analysis included a number of authors active at the 
time,	 such	 as	 Mikołaj	 Rej,	 Jan	 Kochanowski,	 Łukasz	
Górnicki, Kasper Twardowski, Hieronim Morsztyn, Szy-
mon Szymonowic, Szymon Zimorowic, in full aware-
ness of the fact that these are but theoretical possibili-
ties. With the same caveat, we included the anonymous 
author of Tymatas, a single poem of the same period, on 
the off-chance that he might be the mysterious author of 
the erotic poems.
The material for this study, then, consisted of samples by 
the above-mentioned major Polish writers of the broad-
ly-understood turn of the 16th and the 17th centuries, at 
least two per author; the sample sizes were kept as close 
as possible to that of the suspect collection of erotic po-
ems. 
Both sets have been subjected to testing by three different 
tools: Multivariate Analysis (including Cluster Analysis, 
Factor Analysis and Multidimensional Scaling), Bur-
rows’s	 Delta	 (including	 Hoover’s	 and	Argamon’s	 sig-
nificant	modifications	such	as	DeltaOz,	resulting	in	the	
powerful set of Delta spreadsheets, Hoover 2004, 2004a, 
2007, 2007a, Argamon, 2008), and the recent black box 
software, JGAAP 3.3.1 (Juola et al., 2006, 2008), still 
in	 demo	version.	 For	 the	first	 two	 tools,	 various	 com-
binations	of	‘culling,’	wordlist	lengths	and	primary	and	
secondary test groups have been used; in the third, which 
presents	a	variety	of	‘events’	and	statistical	method	com-
binations, those deemed the most reliable by the makers 
of JGAAP were used (Juola, pers. comm.).
In	the	first	stage	of	the	project,	the	three	methods	were	
evaluated for their reliability with this particular material 
and for the best possible parameters and versions of the 
procedures. Multivariate graphs at various levels of most 
frequent words (from 200 to 1000) usually grouped in-
dividual authors correctly, placing together not only two 
samples from single longer texts, but, just as success-
fully, very different writings by the same authors. Usu-
ally the one notable exception was Twardowski, whose 
data	points	seem	to	reflect	the	numerous	turbulences	and	
moral and emotional breakthroughs the poet underwent 
in his tempestuous life. Results for Delta (and especially 
DeltaOz, which proved of the highest reliability here) 
were even more satisfactory, identifying correct authors 
in	the	known	authors’	group	with	a	reliability	of	13	out	of	
15 (ca. 87%) at 250 most frequent words. JGAAP 3.3.1 
fared even a little better at 21/24 (87,5%) correct attribu-
tions, achieved with two options: Kolmogorov-Smirnov 
Distance and Manhattan Distance.
Having established a reasonable reliability of the three 
methods used (and a good consistency between their re-
sults), they were then applied to attribute the collection 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 244
of erotic poems in question, using the same parameters 
that had produced the best results in the test runs.
In multivariate graphs, both MDS and FA refused to place 
the data point for the erotic poems anywhere close to 
any	of	the	Szarzyński	samples.	Various	other	candidates	
came closer – usually different ones at different param-
eters, Twardowski being the only one to do so with any 
consistency, but only when his one volume of erotica, 
Lekcje kupidynowe (“The Lessons of Cupid”) was used 
in the primary sample; in this case, an unusual amount of 
culling (at 40%) was needed to overcome the lexical and/
or generic bias. The same effect was observed in linkage 
distances	 in	 Cluster	Analysis.	 In	 DeltaOz,	 Szarzyński	
was never ranked better than third as a candidate, Ko-
chanowski, Twardowski and Zimorowic usually being 
presented as less unlikely. JGAAP behaved in much the 
same way: not one set of the reliable parameters identi-
fied	Szarzyński	as	the	most	plausible	author.
The conclusion that stems from this analysis is very seri-
ous. It seems that while no candidate has been found, 
with any consistency, as the most probable culprit, the 
almost-accepted	solution	to	what	is	the	most	significant	
attribution	 riddle	 in	 Polish	 literature	 –	 that	 Szarzyński	
is the one who wrote the collection of erotic poems – is 
put to reasonable doubt by the very consistent results of 
stylometric investigation presented here. This is further 
compounded by the fact that while three or four writers 
are	shown	to	be	more	probable	than	Szarzyński	by	our	
analysis, they are much less so basing on historical and 
biographical data (including fellow erotica-writer Twar-
dowski). It seems that – unless new texts are found – the 
room of Polish 16th/17th-century poetry must remain as 
untidy as it has been; that not all poems found there can 
be neatly pigeon-holed to the few authors of the era we 
now know by name.
References
Argamon, S.	 (2008).	 ‘Interpreting	 Burrows’s	 Delta:	
Geometric	and	Probabilistic	Foundations,’	Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 23(2): 131-147.
Burrows, J. F. (2002a). ‘”Delta”: A Measure of Stylistic 
Difference	and	a	Guide	to	Likely	Authorship,’	Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 17: 267-287.
Fleischer, M. (1988). Frequenzlisten zur Lyrik von 
Mikolaj Sep Szarzynski, Jan Jurkowski und Szymon Szy-
monowic und das Problem der statistischen Autorschaft-
sananyse, Munchen: Sagner.
Hoover, D. L. (2004) ‘Testing	Burrows’s	Delta,’	Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing 19: 453-475. 
Hoover, D. L.	(2004a)	‘Delta	Prime?’	Literary and Lin-
guistic Computing 19: 477-495.
Wyderka B. (2002). Przedziwny wszędzie. O stylu 
Mikołaja Sępa Szarzyńskiego na tle tendencji stylistyc-
znych poezji polskiego renesansu, Opole: Wydawnictwo 
Uniwersytetu Opolskiego.
Juola, P., Noecker, J., Ryan, M., and Zhao, M. (2008). 
‘JGAAP3.0	--	Authorship	Attribution	for	the	Rest	of	Us,’	
poster, Oulu: Digital Humanities 2008.
Juola, P., Sofko, J. and Brennan, P. (2006). ‘A Pro-
totype	for	Authorship	Attribution	Studies,’	Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 21:169-178.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  245
