Platform Models for Scholarly 
Journal Publishing:  A Survey 
and Case Study
Sarah Toton 
Emory University 
stoton@emory.edu
The past six years have seen a proliferation of online scholarly journals.  The number of new publica-
tions added to the Directory of Open Access Journals 
(DOAJ), for example, has gone from a trickle of twen-
ty-six	new	journals	in	2002	to	a	torrent	of	five	hundred	
ninety-eight	new	titles	indexed	in	the	first	nine	months	of	
2008. 1  This proliferation has led to publications focus-
ing on more specialized topics, and publishing in nations 
and languages traditionally underserved by Western-fo-
cused academic publishers. Despite the wide variety of 
emerging content, however, the technical infrastructures 
behind these publications remains relatively uniform. 
Constrained by current platform options and multimedia 
literacy on the part of publishers, many journals still op-
erate akin to their print-based predecessors.  By offering 
electronic text-driven arguments, online journals may 
challenge conventional models of delivering scholarly 
content, but do little to augment the emerging shape of 
digital scholarship.  In short, a downloadable PDF is not 
that different than a scanned photocopy. 
This paper examines technologies behind current open-
access journals, and it evaluates how journal content, 
preservation, information architecture, and the review 
process	 influence	and	are	 influenced	by	available	pub-
lishing frameworks. To do this, I survey platforms used 
currently in open-access scholarly publishing. I then fo-
cus on a particular journal, Southern Spaces, and its tran-
sition from hardcoded HTML to a publishing/content 
management system. Through this discussion, I intend 
to address several questions, including: Can journals im-
pact/build scholarly communities? Can they shape and 
enhance a participatory culture on the scholarly level? 
Are existing models of peer-review unnecessarily lim-
ited by restrictive platforms? Is the text-based model 
of	 scholarly	 communication	 good	 enough	 for	 today’s	
scholar?  
The	 paper’s	 survey	 portion	 examines	 existing	 models	
used in electronic publishing from XML schemas (like 
NCBI’s	Journal	Publishing	Tag	Set)	to	the	many	open-
source platforms developed at digital scholarship centers 
and research libraries, including Open Journal Systems 
(OJS) and Digital Publishing System (DPubS).  The 
Public	Knowledge	Project’s	OJS	platform	facilitates	the	
development of open-access scholarship by not only of-
fering an infrastructure for the online presentation of ar-
ticles, but also providing a management system for peer-
review	and	general	editorial	workflow.		A	local	install,	
ease	of	configuration,	and	submission	management	tools	
allow users to develop a technical infrastructure relative-
ly quickly and with little need for system administrator 
support in the maintenance phase. The relatively uniform 
look of OJS journals, however, suggests little capability 
for	extensive	customization.	 	Cornell	 and	Penn	State’s	
DPubS software offers more opportunities for custom-
ization through its modular architecture, as well as the 
potential for interoperability with Fedora and DSpace 
repositories.  In addition, like OJS, DPubS  2.1 offers 
a service for peer-review management.2  While DPubS 
robust design allows for more unique journal instances, 
however,	 it	 also	 requires	 significantly	 more	 back-end	
management and support than OJS.  This makes DPubS 
useful on an institutional level in a library, but the steep 
learning curve and technical requirements may hinder 
adoption among university faculty. Other systems devel-
oped in Europe—Hyperjournal, SOPS, the ePublishing 
Toolkit—seek	 to	 provide	 personal	 archives,	 workflow	
support, publishing networks, and cross-referencing 
tools, but have not yet been adopted by more than a 
handful of scholarly publishers. 
In addition to offering a survey of platform-based pub-
lishing options, this paper examines open-source blog 
publishing tools and content management systems de-
veloped for commercial purposes that are also used by 
electronic scholarly publishers. Flow, a media studies 
journal, and the CodeForLib Journal, for example, uses 
the popular blogging platform, WordPress.3 Museum 
Anthropology Review used WordPress in 2007 before 
switching	 to	 OJS	 in	 2008.	 The	 journal’s	 editors	 still	
maintain the WordPress site as supplementary weblog to 
MAR.4 While implemented less commonly, the content 
management system, Joomla, provides the platform for 
Boston	College	Law	School’s	Intellectual Property and 
Technology Forum.5 These cases address why publish-
ers chose and sometimes abandoned non-academic plat-
forms, and they offer insight into the possibilities and 
drawbacks in modifying commercial-based open-source 
tools.  
This comparative survey illustrates the varied strengths 
and weaknesses of particular publishing platforms, as 
well	as	examines	their	influence	on	the	final	product:	the	
published scholarship.  I then turn to Southern Spaces 
(www.southernspaces.org), an open-access, interdisci-
plinary	journal	housed	in	Emory	University’s	Woodruff	
Library.  My experience as an editor, media coordinator 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 284
and the Managing Editor has shown me how technologi-
cal	 decisions	 influence	 the	 daily	 operations	 of	 journal	
publishing,	as	well	as	 the	final	shape	of	scholarly	con-
tent. This year, in particular, marks a major transition 
for the journal. Southern Spaces will undergo a substan-
tial redesign in the coming months, transitioning from 
HTML pages created in Dreamweaver to a Drupal 6 
platform integrated with a Fedora repository. 
To determine the new information architecture for 
Southern Spaces, I conducted two surveys: one to board 
members and peer reviewers, the other to junior and in-
dependent scholars new to Southern Spaces. Based on 
user feedback as well as an internal we conceived a new 
workflow	 process,	 navigation	 structures,	 pedagogical	
tools, as well as several opportunities for community de-
velopment within the site. The redesign, I anticipate, will 
allow Southern Spaces authors and staff to develop mul-
timedia publications that incorporate links, video, audio, 
and Flash features. In addition, the process will develop 
interactive features that not only allow for reader feed-
back, but also provide a better infrastructure for citing 
and collecting Southern Spaces articles. These directions 
extend from Southern Spaces’s	goals,	which	are	 likely	
similar to many open-access journals: offer a research 
tool, expand the visitor community, sustain and preserve 
digital content, streamline the pre-publication process, 
develop a learning environment for interdisciplinary 
scholars as well as scholars new to digital scholarship. 
Choosing a publishing platform not only dramatically 
influences	published	content,	but	also	has	 the	potential	
to change the landscape of online scholarly communica-
tion.  Who edits, reviews, publishes and hosts a jour-
nal	 influences	 technological	 decisions,	 but	 these	 deci-
sions also dramatically impact what can and cannot be 
displayed as vetted scholarship, as well as the limits of 
scholarly	participation	 in	a	 journal’s	 (or	a	discipline’s)	
wider community. In this rapidly expanding landscape 
of online scholarship, technological change and the deci-
sions	behind	this	change	aren’t	always	apparent.		Yet,	in	
order to understand how digital publishing is changing, 
it is key to look beyond the number of online journals to 
the variety of online publishing options and their impact 
beyond the computer screen. 
References
Borgman, C. (2007). Scholarship in the Digital Age: In-
formation, Infrastructure, and the Internet. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press.
Brown, A. (2002). XSD Schemas in Book and Journal 
Publishing.  XML Europe.  http://www.idealliance.org/
papers/xmle02/dx_xmle02/papers/03-01-02/03-01-02.
html (accessed 11 November 2008).
Sparc Europe (2008). Open Access Journals: Over-
view. http://www.sparceurope.org/resources/hot-topics/
open-journals (accessed 11 November 2008).
Solomon D. (2008). Developing Open Access Journals: 
A Practical Guide. Oxford: Chandos Press. 
Willinsky, J. (2005). Open Journal Systems: An Exam-
ple of Open Source Software for Journal Management 
and Publishing. Library Hi-Tech 23: 504-519. 
Notes
1Gavin Baker (2008). Growth of DOAJ: Steady 2003-
2007,	Major	Spike	in	2008.	A	Journal	of	Insignificant	In-
quiry. October 17, 2008. This study is somewhat limited 
as the DOAJ offers only two pieces of chonodata: date 
journal was started and date journal was added to the 
DOAJ.  This study indicates when journals were added 
to the DOAJ, but not necessarily when became open ac-
cess. 
2This build was launched in June 2007, and it remains 
the most recent version as of November 2008.  Docu-
mentation for 2.1 was last update in March 2008. 
3The CodeforLib Journal (http://journal.code4lib.org/) 
currently uses WordPress 2.6.3.  Flow uses 2.5 (for their 
second redesign, Flow used a WordPress skin called The 
Morning After, which gave the publication a magazine 
style; they currently use the MimboPro template, also 
designed for magazine style sites.) In late 2008, a DOAJ 
Export Plugin was developed for WordPress, allowing 
publishers of OA journals to provide article-level data 
to the DOAJ, thereby opening articles up to discovery 
through	DOAJ’s	interface.
4The Museum Anthropology Weblog’s	 “About”	 page	
explains:	 “While,	 during	 its	 first	 year	 (2007)	 the	 jour-
nal itself was published on this site, the journal is now 
published using Open Journal Systems by the Indiana 
University Bloomington Libraries.” http://museuman-
thropology.net/about/ (accessed 10 November 2008).
5Paul Ham (2006). Using Joomla for an Online Law 
Journal. Intellectual Property and Technology Forum. 
Boston College Law School. Boston, MA. July 9, 2006. 
http://bciptf.org/blog/2006/07/09/using-joomla-for-
an-online-law-journal/. (accessed 9 November 2008). 
Several comments discuss other publishing platforms, 
including citing OJS.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  285
