Science Fiction in the Lives of 
Scientists and Engineers 
Kenneth R. Fleischmann 
University of Maryland, College Park 
kfleisch@umd.edu	
Thomas Clay Templeton 
NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
thomas.c.templeton@nasa.gov	
Introduction 
This	study	explores	the	influence	of	science	fiction	read	
in childhood on the career choices and research trajec-
tories of scientists and engineers. Mosco (2004) argues 
that	science	fiction,	as	modern-day	myths,	significantly	
impacts how people think about and view the world. 
Scholars	of	 science	fiction	argue	 that	 science	fiction	 is	
an	 influential	element	of	contemporary	American	soci-
ety (Disch, 1998; Malmgren, 1991; Stableford, 1987). 
Specifically,	one	interesting	facet	of	this	issue	is	the	role	
of	 science	 fiction	 in	 influencing	 public	 understanding	
of and attitudes toward science (Chaloner, 1998; Claes-
sens,	 2004).	 Indeed,	 one	 additional	 significant	 societal	
implication	of	science	fiction	 is	 the	 impact	 it	can	have	
in	 structuring	 and	 changing	 individuals’	 lives	 (Bacon-
Smith, 2000; Jenkins, 1992). Science and literature stud-
ies examine the relationship between technoscience and 
science	fiction	on	a	conceptual	level	and	thus	serve	as	an	
important inspiration for this study (Dery, 1996; Doyle, 
1997; Haraway, 2004; Hayles, 1999), but have not un-
dertaken empirical research to examine the impact of 
science	fiction	on	 the	 lives	of	 scientists	and	engineers.	
This	focus	on	the	role	of	science	fiction	in	the	lives	of	
scientists and engineers is part of the larger theme of the 
book in the life of the reader, or how literature affects 
readers’	 everyday	 lives	 (Andringa	 and	 Scheier,	 2004;	
Kaestle, 1991; Pawley, 2002; Polhemus and Henkle, 
2005; Wiegand, 1998). This study seeks to determine if 
and	how	science	fiction	affects	technoscientific	research.	
Methods 
Data collection included fourteen semi-structured inter-
views with scientists and engineers as the NASA God-
dard Space Flight Center. Interviews were conducted 
using an oral history approach (Baumgartener and Payr, 
1995; Lyons and Taksa, 1982; Radway, 1991; Ritchie, 
2003; Sommer and Quinlan, 2002; Thompson, 2000; 
Yow, 2005). Interviews were recorded, transcribed, and 
analyzed using grounded theory (Strauss and Corbin, 
1998).	 Specifically,	 the	 researchers	 first	 independently	
coded	interviews	line-by-line	to	identify	specific	factors	
that	 influenced	 the	 career	 choices	of	 scientists	 and	en-
gineers. The researchers then compared their two lists 
of factors and used them to build a list of clusters that 
encompassed multiple factors. 
Results:	Factors	Influencing	the	Career	
Choices of Scientists and Engineers 
This	 research	 identified	 ten	 predominant	 clusters	 of	
factors that NASA Goddard scientists and engineers 
described	as	influencing	their	career	choices:	the	space	
program,	science	fiction,	informal	education,	formal	ed-
ucation, the job market, serendipity, personal attributes, 
values, family and friends, and the physical environ-
ment.	Each	of	 these	clusters	was	 identified	 in	multiple	
interviews, and most of the factors within each cluster 
were also found in multiple interviews. The complex in-
terconnections among these diverse factors are depicted 
in Figure 1. 
Figure 1: Clusters of Factors that Influence the Career 
Choices of Scientists and Engineers 
The space program included factors such as the space 
race,	 from	the	 launch	of	Sputnik	 to	 the	first	successful	
Apollo Moon landing, as well as more recent events such 
as	 the	 space	 shuttle	 program.	 Science	 fiction	 included	
both	 ‘hard’	 science	fiction	by	authors	 such	as	Asimov,	
Clarke,	and	Heinlein	and	popular	forms	of	science	fic-
tion such as Star Wars and Star Trek. Informal educa-
tion included factors such as museums, kits, and books. 
Formal education included factors such as K-12 and 
undergraduate science courses. The job market included 
factors such as the availability of jobs in different areas 
at different times. Serendipity included factors such as 
whom the interviewees knew and how one life event led 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  111
to another. Personal attributes included factors such as 
gender,	interest	in	different	levels	of	abstraction,	and	fi-
nancial considerations. Values included factors such as 
curiosity and altruism. Family and friends included fac-
tors	such	as	the	career	choices	and	influence	of	parents,	
siblings, grandparents, and friends. The physical envi-
ronment included factors such as fascination with the 
night sky and with nature parks. 
Results:	Themes	for	the	Influence	of	
Science Fiction on Technoscience 
The	findings	of	this	study	demonstrate	that	science	fic-
tion	can	influence	the	career	choices	of	scientists	and	en-
gineers. Scientists and engineers explained that science 
fiction,	“kept	me	interested	in	science	and	astronomy;”	
“may	be	a	lot	of	people’s	first	experience	with	real	sci-
ence;” “may keep you inspired;” and “continues to spark 
people’s	imaginations.”	A	total	of	eight	major	themes	for	
the	 influence	 of	 science	 fiction	 on	 technoscience	were	
identified:	worldview/perspective,	 ideas/insights/inven-
tions, inspiration, initial exposure, shared culture/shared 
meaning/socialization, reinforcement, excitement, and 
curiosity. 
Limitations 
As in the case of all interview research, data may be 
influenced	 by	 self-report	 bias.	 Further,	 inquiry	 about	
childhood	 influences	 on	 professional	 development	 are	
highly speculative, as it is often not possible to discern 
among	the	many	factors	that	influence	decision-making.	
Further, with such a small sample, it is not possible to 
determine	the	likelihood	of	influence	by	science	fiction	
and other factors; rather, it is only possible to report on 
the self-reported experiences of this small sample of sci-
entists and engineers. 
Future Research Directions 
One planned future direction is to conduct a broad sur-
vey to test hypotheses developed as a result of the inter-
views. This planned study would include a larger sample 
of scientists and engineers from a broader range of or-
ganizations	and	fields.	Another	possible	future	direction	
is to develop educational interventions that use science 
fiction	to	interest	undergraduate	students	in	science	and	
engineering, building on earlier work in this area (Berne 
and Schummer, 2005; Raham, 2004). This study pro-
vides	empirical	evidence	that	science	fiction	influences	
the career choices and research trajectories of scientists 
and engineers, and points toward ways to use such edu-
cational programs to increase the size and diversity of 
the science and engineering workforce. 
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant SES-0731819. 
The authors would also like to thank the fourteen scien-
tists and engineers who participated in this study. 
References
Andringa, E., and Scheier, M. (2004). How Literature 
Enters life: An Introduction. Poetics Today, 25: 161-169. 
Bacon-Smith, C. (2000). Science Fiction Culture. Phila-
delphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Baumgartner, P., and Payr, S. (1995). Speaking Minds. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Berne, R. W., and Schummer, J. (2005). Teaching Soci-
etal and Ethical Implications of Nanotechnology to En-
gineering Students Through Science Fiction. Bulletin of 
Science, Technology, and Society, 25: 459-468. 
Chaloner,	P.	A.	(1998).	Chemistry	in	TV	science	fiction:	
Star Trek and Dr. Who. In J. H. Stocker (Ed.), Chemistry 
and Science Fiction. Washington, DC: American Chemi-
cal Society. 
Claessens, M., ed. (2004). Science Fiction: Intuition and 
Fantasy. RTDinfo: Magazine for European Research 
Special Issue, (March), 21-23. 
Dery, M. (1996). Escape Velocity: Cyberculture at the 
End of the Century. New York: Grove Press. 
Disch, T. M. (1998). The Dreams Our Stuff Is Made Of: 
How Science Fiction Conquered the World. New York: 
The Free Press. 
Doyle, R. (1997). On Beyond Living: Rhetorical Trans-
formations of the Life Sciences. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press. 
Haraway, D. J. (2004). The Haraway Reader. New York: 
Routledge. 
Hayles, N. K. (1999). How We Became Posthuman: Vir-
tual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Jenkins, H. (1992). Textual Poachers: Television Fans 
and Participatory Culture. New York: Routledge. 
Kaestle, C. F. (1991). The History of Readers. In Kaes-
tle, C. F.; Damon-Moore, H.; Stedman, L. C.; Tinsley, 
K.; and Trollinger, Jr., W.V. (eds), Literacy in the United 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 112
States: Readers and Reading Since 1880. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press. 
Lyons, M., and Taksa, L. (1992). Australian Readers Re-
member: An Oral History of Reading 1890-1930. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
Malmgren, C.D. (1991). Worlds Apart: Narratology of 
Science Fiction. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press. 
Mosco, V. (2004). The Digital Sublime: Myth, Power, 
and Cyberspace. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Pawley,	C.	(2002).	Seeking	‘Significance’:	Actual	Read-
ers,	 Specific	 Reading	 Communities.	 Book History, 5: 
143-160. 
Polhemus, R. M., and Henkle, R. B., eds. (2005). Criti-
cal Reconstructions: The Relationship of Fiction and 
Life. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Radway, J. A. (1984). Reading the Romance: Women, 
Patriarchy, and Popular Literature. Chapel Hill, NC: 
University of North Carolina Press. 
Raham, R. G. (2004). Teaching Science Fact with Sci-
ence Fiction. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Ritchie, D. A. (2003). Doing Oral History, A Practical 
Guide, Second Edition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press. 
Sommer, B. W., and Quinlan, M. K. (2002). The Oral 
History Manual. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. 
Stableford, B. M. (1987). The Sociology of Science Fic-
tion. San Bernadino, CA: The Borgo Press. 
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing 
Grounded Theory, Second Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 
Thompson, P. R. (2000). The Voice of the Past: Oral His-
tory, Third Edition. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Wiegand, W. A. (1998). Theoretical Foundations for 
Analyzing Print Culture as Agency and Practice in a Di-
verse Modern America. In J. P. Dansky and W. A. Wie-
gand (eds), Print Culture in a Diverse America. Urbana, 
IL: University of Illinois Press. 
Yow, V. R. (2005). Recording Oral History: A Guide for 
the Humanities and Social Sciences, Second Edition. 
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  113
