Sentiment Analysis of Fictional 
Characters Based on Entity 
Profiles
Rohini K. Srihari
University at Buffalo
rohini@cedar.buffalo.edu
 
Laurie Crist
Janya, Inc
lcrist@janyainc.com
Harish Srinivasan 
Janya, Inc
hsrinivasan@janyainc.com
Introduction
There has been an increasing interest in applying au-tomatic text analysis techniques to various text clas-
sification	problems	in	literature	and	the	social	sciences.	
Examples of such tasks include determining biases in 
political coverage, or analyzing mood in literature. Ear-
lier techniques were based on simplistic corpus analy-
sis techniques such as counting word frequencies and 
co-occurrences. The access to robust machine learning 
technology and tools has enabled more sophisticated text 
mining techniques to be developed. Yu (Yu, 2008) dis-
cusses	the	use	of	text	classification	methods	in	the	liter-
ary domain. His study compared the performance of two 
popular algorithms, naïve Bayes and support vector ma-
chines	 (SVMs)	 in	 two	 literary	 text	 classification	 tasks.	
While this trend represents progress in automatic text 
mining,	 it	 still	 reflects	 a	 reliance	 on	 primitive	 features	
such as the bag-of-words model. In such models, text is 
represented as a vector of weighted words; word order 
is disregarded and only frequency information is used. 
Such techniques are inherently limited in the granular-
ity of the analysis they can perform, typically limited to 
the	document	level.	For	more	fine-grained	tasks	such	as	
sentiment analysis with respect to people, characters or 
topics, a more sophisticated model of relevant context is 
required.
This work discusses the use of entity profiles to represent 
the context in which to make judgments regarding an en-
tity, where an entity can represent an individual or an or-
ganization,	or	other	salient	entity	types.	An	entity	profile	
reflects	a	consolidation	of	all	important	information	per-
taining to an entity within a document. For a person (or a 
character	in	a	novel),	the	entity	profile	would	include	all	
mentions of the individual, including co-referential men-
tions, as well as relationships and events involving the 
person. The representation of such information is typi-
cally highly structured such as spouse_of(Maria 
Bertram, Mr. Rushworth) with a link to the text 
snippet or sentence from which the relationship or event 
was	extracted.	An	entity	profile,	when	compiled	from	a	
collection of documents, or a lengthy novel is rich in-
formation that provides the required context in which to 
compare two individuals, classify human behaviour, etc. 
Automatically	extracting	entity	profiles	(and	associated	
text snippets) is a challenging task in information extrac-
tion; the next section describes a system which has been 
designed for this purpose. The rest of the paper describes 
the	use	of	entity	profiles	as	the	context	in	which	automat-
ic	 sentiment	 analysis	 (Chesley	 et	 al,	 2006)	of	fictional	
characters can be computed. The example is from Jane 
Austen’s	Mansfield	Park.
Semantex: An Information Extraction 
Engine
Semantex (Srihari 2008) is a domain independent, in-
termediate level information extraction (IE) engine. The 
linguistic processor modules support different levels 
of natural language processing, including orthography, 
morphology, syntax, co-reference resolution, semantics, 
and discourse. The categories of information objects cre-
ated by Semantex are (i) Named Entities (NE): proper 
names of persons, organizations, product, location etc., 
(ii) Correlated Entity (CE) relationships: capture local 
relationships between entities within sentence boundar-
ies. The results are consolidated into EPs based on co-
reference	 and	 alias	 support,	 (iii)	 Entity	 Profiles	 (EP):	
Entity	Profiles	are	complex	rich	information	objects	that	
collect entity-centric information—in particular, all the 
individual mentions of an entity in a document and any 
CE relationships the entity is involved in, (iv) Subject-
Verb-Object (SVO) triples: SVO triples decoded by Se-
mantex are logical, rather than syntactic: surface varia-
tions such as active voice vs. passive voice are decoded 
into the same underlying logical relationships, (v) Gen-
eral Events (GE): verb-centric information objects repre-
senting `who did what to whom when and where'. These 
five	types	of	information	objects	capture	key	content	of	
the processed text. For this project, the most relevant ob-
jects are CEs, EPs, and SVOs.
Sentiment Analysis based on Context 
provided	by	Entity	Profiles
We use the set of text snippets (or sentences) from an en-
tity	profile	as	the	context	in	which	features	for	sentiment	
analysis are computed. Sentiment analysis is performed 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 264
in	 two	 phases:	 (i)	 the	 first	 phase,	 training,	 focuses	 on	
compiling a lexicon of subjective words and phrases 
along with their polarities (positive/negative) and an as-
sociated weight. (ii) in the second phase, sentiment as-
sociation, a text document collection is processed and 
sentiment	assigned	to	entity	profiles	of	interest.
For sentiment analysis, a lexicon of subjective words/
phrases (those with positive or negative polarity associ-
ated	with	them)	is	first	compiled	through	(i)	expansion	
from adjectives in WordNet using synonyms based on 
positive and negative seed adjectives and (ii) use of a 
search	engine	to	find	words	that	appear	“near”	a	known	
positive/negative adjective. To associate sentiment with 
an entity, we accumulate polarity weights (using a slid-
ing	window)	from	the	sentences	within	the	entity	profile;	
thresholding	results	in	a	final	positive,	negative	or	neu-
tral polarity for the entity in question. 
Sentiment Analysis applied to Jane Austen’s 
Mansfield Park
In this section, sentiment analysis has been applied to 
characters in Mansfield Park	by	Jane	Austen.	Specifical-
ly,	it	has	been	applied	to	the	entity	profile	for	the	charac-
ter Mary Crawford at different times in the novel. This is 
the process that was employed.
1. The	 text	 of	Mansfield	 Park	 ,	 originally	 consisting	
of 159,500 words was split into four parts at chap-
ter breaks with some consideration to the progress 
of the plot. These breaks were chosen to track the 
transformation of the character Mary Crawford 
from	first	meeting	 through	 the	 revelation	 of	 some	
flaws	in	the	character.
2. Each of the four sections was processed by Seman-
tex;	entity	profiles	were	generated	for	all	the	charac-
ters, including Mary Crawford. This resulted in four 
entity	profiles	for	Mary	Crawford	at	different	stages	
in the plot.
3. Sentiment analysis was computed for each of the 
entity	profiles:	the	goal	was	to	correlate	the	output	
of automatic sentiment analysis with the transfor-
mation in the character over time.
The sentiment analysis output based on two entity pro-
files	 for	 Mary	 Crawford	 generated	 at	 different	 stages	
(parts one and three) is shown in the table below. Part 
three	 reflects	 the	 duration	 of	 time	 just	 before	 and	 af-
ter	 Maria’s	 elopement	 with	 Henry	 Crawford,	 Mary’s	
brother.	Mary’s	 reaction	 to	 this	 event	 exposes	flaws	 in	
her	nature,	and	contributes	to	a	reader’s	judgment	of	her	
character as negative. In each case, a subset of the sub-
jective words that contribute to the overall polarity (posi-
tive or negative) are shown, along with snippets of text 
(based	on	entity	profile)	in	which	those	words	appeared.	
These text  snippets are a subset of the sentences which 
contribute	to	the	entity	profile	for	Mary	Crawford.	The	
entire	 profile	 is	 not	 shown	 for	 space	 considerations.	 It	
should	be	noted	that	snippets	from	the	entity	profile	are	
not necessarily contiguous.
Our	system	has	judged	the	first	profile	to	be	positive,	but	
the second one to be neutral rather than negative.  This 
could be partly due to an aggregation of sentiment that 
is performed over the entire section.  There is consid-
erable effort that remains in improving the accuracy of 
automated	sentiment	analysis	of	fictional	characters.		For	
example, words such as “ashamed” and “embarrassed” 
are not necessarily associated with negative sentiment 
depending on the context.  Another problem is proper as-
sociation of the sentiment with the character in question. 
We continue to work on these issues. 
Co-referential Mentions: Mary, Mary Crawford, Miss 
Crawford, she, herself, his sister
Sentiment Part 1 of 4 Part 3 of 4
Polarity Positive Neutral
Probability 0.673 0.883
Subjective 
Words
agreeable 0.49
bad -0.601
beauty 0.98
clever 0.49
comfort 0.4
dearest 1.154
delighted 0.53
disinclination -0.506
displeased -0.49
elegance 0.49
happiness 0.49
inconceivable -0.49
laughingly 0.495
liking 0.446
lively 0.3
not mean 0.4
pleasant 0.5
pretty 0.4
proud 0.6
very clever 0.8
abominable 
-0.601
agitation -0.939
ashamed -1.96
attractive 0.6
be	satisfied	0.586
betraying -0.751
bitter -0.601
comfort 1.6
dearest 2.308
discontented 
-0.651
embarrassed 
-0.651
frown -0.55
manners 2.003
nobly 0.92
satisfactorily 0.6
shame -1.069
smile 1.47
unpleasant -0.683
vain -0.865
vexation -0.54
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  265
Snippets Mary Crawford was
remarkably pretty... 
the
manners of both 
were
lively and pleasant...
Mary
was her dearest
object...You will be 
kinder
than Mary. Dr. Grant
laughingly congratu-
lated
Miss Crawford... 
Miss
Crawford ‘s beauty 
did her
no disservice...Mary 
was
satisfied	with	the
Parsonage...and not 
at all
displeased either 
at her
sister...we	find	
comfort
somewhere
To Mary it was 
every way
painful...and I 
wish they
may be heartily 
ashamed of
their own abomi-
nable
neglect and
unkindness...she 
thought
there was a smile 
-- which
made her blush 
and feel
wretched...if he 
really
loved her , and 
were
unhappy too !. 
There was
comfort...confu-
sion to
form the clearest 
judgment
of Miss Craw-
ford‘s
meaning
Conclusions
This paper has described an experiment in which auto-
matic sentiment analysis is used to illustrate either the 
change in a character, or the perception of the character 
by other characters over the progression of a story.  En-
tity	profiles	provide	rich	context	in	which	to	attempt	oth-
er tasks, such as measuring the similarity of characters, 
both within a novel, as well as across novels. Standard 
document similarity measures may be used to accom-
plish this.
The challenge to making this technique more robust is 
the accuracy of coreference, including anaphora resolu-
tion.  Mistakes in this module can cause irrelevant sen-
tences	to	be	pulled	into	the	entity	profile,	thus	rendering	
the analysis inaccurate.  Efforts are underway to improve 
this accuracy.  Sentiment analysis can also be improved 
by	fine	tuning	the	association	of	subjective	words	with	
the correct character.  Nevertheless, this is a more so-
phisticated method of performing text analysis with re-
spect to analyzing human behaviour.
References
R. K. Srihari, W. Li, C. Niu and T. Cornell (2008) "In-
foXtract: A Customizable
Intermediate Level Information Extraction Engine," 
Journal of Natural Language Engineering, Cambridge 
U. Press, 14(1), 2008, pp.33-69.
P. Chesley, B. Vincent, L. Xu, and R. K. Srihari (2006) 
"Using Verbs and Adjectives to Automatically Classify 
Blog Sentiment”, Proc. AAAI-2006 Spring Symposium 
on Computational Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs, 
Stanford University, CA March 2006, AAAI Press, TR 
SS-06-03, pp.27-29.
Bei	Yu	(2008)	An	evaluation	of	text	classification	meth-
ods for literary study, Linguist Computing 23: 327-343.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 266
