Should an electronic edition 
walk, swim or shake its tail 
feathers?
Frederico Meschini 
De Montfort University 
fmeschini@dmu.ac.uk 
The scholarly activity of creating a critical edition of a literary work is an extremely complex process, com-
posed of many steps, each involving different features 
and therefore requiring different skills. For instance 
Wilhelm Ott described eight different steps, each one 
corresponding to a particular software module in the Tu-
STEP system, starting with the collection of witnesses 
and ending with the edition publication, passing through 
intermediate phases such as collation, constitution of 
copy-text, compilation of apparatuses and indexes cre-
ation (Ott, 1992) .
But it would be very naïve to suppose that the cur-
rent paradigmatic and epistemological shift from print 
to electronic medium in producing scholarly editions 
would be without consequences for textual editing as re-
cently pointed out by Peter Shillingsburg (Shillingsburg, 
2006).	Whereas	the	printed	publication	is	the	last	and	fi-
nal	step	in	Ott’s	workflow,	in	the	digital	world	this	same	
phase is no longer a dead end, allowing for further, and 
potentially endless processing.
The	 actual	 crux	 is	 the	 analysis,	 definition	 and	 under-
standing of these consequences, which, to be as possible 
comprehensive and effective as possible should be car-
ried out both on an intellectual and a practical level. The 
more tangible effects are focused at the two extremes of 
the scholarly process, which from being the most me-
chanical steps now acquire a new dimension and impor-
tance: on the one hand the transcription of the textual 
artefacts, which at present is a structural and semantic 
encoding, and, on the other, the dissemination modali-
ties, which address how the edition is initially assem-
bled and subsequently published. While much theoreti-
cal discussion has focused on text encoding, the same 
is not true, with some notable exceptions, for the other 
extreme: the actual creation of the edition.
An implicit complexity seems to be inseparable from 
any thinking or talking about electronic scholarly edi-
tions.	 It’s	 not	 by	 chance	 therefore	 that	 Susan	 Hockey	
in Electronic Texts in the Humanities wrote that “Much 
confusion seems to surround the topic of electronic edi-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  205
tions” (Hockey, 2000). This is due to the fact that the 
digital edition is a dynamic and mutable object in itself: 
its nature as an electronic text which, like spoken lan-
guage,	allows	it	to	be	processed	in	a	reflexive	way,	and	
therefore being augmented with new features and uses. 
But there is more than this. The extreme complexity of 
critical digital editions is generated by an aspect almost 
always neglected but at the same time quite fundamen-
tal: the multidimensionality of this strange animal, com-
monly	known	as	‘electronic	edition’.	Both	Jerome	Mc-
Gann (McGann, 2004) and Claus Huitfeldt (Huitfeldt, 
1994)	underline	how	the	object	‘text’	has	more	than	one	
dimension: why can the same principle not be applied to 
the environment which contains, preserves and allows 
the interactions with this object?
A	first	method	of	describing	this	complexity	can	be	found	
in	‘A	framework	for	information	system	architecture’	by	
J. A. Zachman (Zachman, 1987) where the author theo-
rizes a possible formal structure for investigating the ar-
chitecture of information systems. This structure is an 
interpretational matrix where the different perspectives, 
tied to the different user roles of the system, are joined 
by the different descriptions of the information system, 
each one referring to a particular model: functional, in-
formational, technological, etc. The primacy conclusion 
is that an information system is represented by a whole 
set of architectural representations, each one with a par-
ticular nature, and communication between these differ-
ent levels is a key issue. Scholarly editions can be con-
sidered as a specialized subset of information systems, 
if	not	very	refined	‘knowledge	systems’	at	all,	the	main	
difference	being	 that	 they	 respond	 to	 specific	needs	of	
humanities research and not to generic business needs. 
Therefore	 Zachman’s	 proposal	 can	 also	 be	 applied	 to	
good	effects	in	this	particular	field.
A further step in trying to formalize digital editions is 
by means of specialized frameworks expressly created 
for the digital library world. Even though electronic edi-
tions and digital libraries are two different paradigms, 
like	men	in	Shakespeare’s	Tempest they share the stuff 
that	‘dreams	are	made	on’.	The	two	frameworks	are	the	
5S (Gonçalves et al., 2004) and DELOS (Candela et al., 
2007). The 5S model is based on set theory and linear al-
gebra,	and	using	five	primitive	concepts	(Stream,	Struc-
tures, Scenarios, Spaces and Societies) it builds upon 
these	a	series	of	definition,	thus	being	able	to	define	what	
a digital library is without ambiguity. On the other hand 
the DELOS approach shares many similarities with the 
CIDOC-CRM ontology (Crofts et al., 2007), being based 
on an object-relationship model. With the help of these 
two models, I will analyze the differences between digi-
tal libraries and electronic editions. 
Starting from an empirical analysis of concrete cases, 
some basic principles will be presented using a polar-
ity approach. An actual limitation in an edition will be 
used as the starting point to develop an opposite prin-
ciple which will be used to overcome it. These principles 
are the following: incompatibility vs. semantic umbrella/
glue; sonic screwdriver vs. lego-block; blob vs. crystal 
snow; incompleteness vs. extensibility. 
Finally the relationship between the latest innovations in 
electronic (web) publishing and scholarly editions will 
be examined. Using the “swimming” metaphor, Charles 
Michael Sperberg-McQueen pointed out the main dif-
ference between printed and electronic editions: while 
the former are embedded with some kind of implicit 
knowledge, the latter can contain the same knowledge 
expressed in formal languages, being moreover en-
dowed with some active features (Sperberg-McQueen, 
2002). This same difference between facts on one side 
and features on the other can be mapped to the current 
paradigms of Semantic Web and Web 2.0. An electronic 
edition is therefore an ideal place of interaction between 
these two different aspects of the WorldWideWeb, which 
are usually considered in opposition to each other.
References
Candela, L., D. Castelli, N. Ferro, Y. Ioannidis, G. Kou-
trika, C. Meghini, P. Pagano, S. Ross, D. Soergel, M. 
Agosti, M. Dobreva, V. Katifori, and H. Schuldt (2007). 
The DELOS Digital Library Reference Model. Founda-
tions for Digital Libraries Version 0.98. DELOS Net-
work of Excellence on Digital Libraries.
Crofts, N., M. Doerr, T. Gill, S. Stead, M. Stiff (eds) 
(2007) Definition of the CIDOC Conceptual Reference 
Model: Version 4.2.2. ICOM - International Council of 
Musesum.
Gonçalves, M. A., Fox, E. A., Watson, L. T., & Kipp, 
N. A. (2004). Streams, Structures, Spaces, Scenarios, 
Societies (5S): A Formal Model for Digital Libraries, 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 22 
(2): 270-312.
Hockey S. (2000). Electronic Texts in the Humanities: 
Principles and Practice. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Huitfeldt C. (1994). Multi-dimensional texts in a one-
dimensional medium, Computers and the Humanities, 
Vol. 28, No. 4-5: 235-241
McGann J. (2004). Marking Texts of Many Dimensions. 
In S. Schreibman, R. Siemens, J. Unsworth (eds.), A 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 206
Companion to Digital Humanities, Oxford: Blackwell, 
pp. 198-217
Shillingsburg, P. (2006) From Gutenberg to Google: 
Electronic Representations of Literary Texts, Cambridge 
University Press
Ott, W. (1992). Computers and Textual Editing, In Butler 
C. S. (ed.), Computers and Written Texts. Oxford: Black-
well, 1992. 205-226.
Sperberg-McQueen, C. M. (2002). How to Teach Your 
Edition How to Swim <http://www.w3.org/People/cms-
mcq/2002/cep97/swimming.xml>
Zachman, J. A (1987). A framework for information 
systems architecture, IBM Systems Journal, 26 (3): 276-
292.
