Supporting the Creation of 
Scholarly Bibliographies by 
Communities through Social 
Collaboration 
Hamed Alhoori
Texas A&M University, USA 
alhoori@tamu.edu	
Omar Álvarez
Texas A&M University, USA 
aomar@tamu.edu	
Miguel Muñiz 
Texas A&M University, USA
apresam@gmail.com
 
Richard Furuta 
Texas A&M University, USA
furuta@cs.tamu.edu 
Eduardo Urbina 
Texas A&M University, USA
e-urbina@tamu.edu		
Background 
Many digital humanities projects maintain online bibliography digital libraries (BDLs) that support 
diverse users in locating a variety of references. The Cer-
vantes Project (CP) bibliography aims to represent the 
best resources about Cervantes published since 1605 and 
is drawn from many multilingual sources. The current 
CP	bibliography	gathering	and	filtering	process	 is	 car-
ried out by sets of contributors: the expert editors, the 
reviewers, and the authorized international collabora-
tors.	Delays,	possibly	months,	can	result	from	the	filter-
ing process and also from the process of uploading the 
new publications into the BDL, which is separate from 
the	gathering	and	filtering	process.	In	addition,	the	abil-
ity	to	find	new	entries	online	is	limited.	Current	biblio-
graphic search engines show a limited scope of coverage 
on literature. There is no single resource that handles the 
entire 2.5 million articles that emerge yearly from the 
25,000 peer-reviewed journals (Harnad, S. et al., 2008), 
so these engines access only a fraction of the literature 
(Hull, D. et al., 2008). 
We	compared	various	humanities	BDL’s	main	supported	
features. Table 1 summarizes the main outcomes. Note 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 120
that the majority of these BDLs do not take advantage of 
the social collaboration of Web 2.0. 
Table 1.  Various Humanities BDL supported features 
This	 paper’s	 premise	 is	 that	 social	 collaboration	 with	
the right level of moderation can support and reduce the 
costs	of	creating	a	scholarly	bibliography	by	benefiting	
from the “wisdom of the crowds” (Surowiecki, J., 2004), 
while ensuring the accuracy of the bibliography. This 
could lead researchers to needed and interesting resourc-
es in better time. We have experimented with this issue 
by implementing a set of functionalities built on the dru-
pal CMS. We have tested them on a group of CP users 
from different countries who use a variety of languages 
to gather, share, annotate, rank and discover academic 
literature (Fig. 1). We report on these initial experiments 
in the remainder of this paper.
Personalization 
Zotero, Mendeley and Papers are personal reference 
management tools. However they do not include social 
collaboration features. We implemented a personal fa-
cility named MyCibo (Fig. 2), where users can save or 
edit their references, personal pages, and blogs with the 
ability to make them private or public. They can import 
and export in EndNote tagged, XML, RIS, and BibTeX 
formats and manually connect related publications. 
Fig. 1 Screenshot from the main CIBO interface 
Fig. 2 Administrator MyCibo 
Social technologies applied to 
bibliographies 
Social Bookmarking  
Most online libraries and bibliographies provide one way 
learning, in that they provide services to the users, while 
prohibiting users from contributing. This results in a 
huge loss of knowledge and almost a freezing of storage 
rather than active libraries. The current state of the art is 
moving toward two way learning, where the users can 
both	benefit	from	the	available	knowledge	and	contrib-
ute to it. (Hendry, D.G. et al. 2006b) mentioned an ‘ama-
teur	bibliography’	that	 is	collected	by	non	professionals 
and falls short of the standards of a professional bibli-
ography. Although large amount of references could be 
collected in a short span of time, resulting issues such as 
redundancy, spam, phantom author names, and phantom 
citations are not a good sign of scholarly research (Jacso, 
P . 2008). 
Unlike some general online reference management soft-
ware such as CiteULike and Connotea that are based on 
the concept of non-moderated social bookmarking, we 
considered the previous issues and the need for an ac-
curate bibliography. To get this done, light moderating 
and authenticating of the users contributions to the CP 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  121
bibliography is provided, aiming to reach the scholarly 
moderated bibliography (Hendry, D.G. et al. 2006a). 
Users were given ranks according to their scholarly or 
contribution level. For example, well known scholars 
got higher ranks so that they could contribute directly 
without	moderating	their	contributions.	New	users’	pub-
lic contributions will be entered into a queue waiting 
for an approval from a moderator. Users who contribute 
with relevant and accurate contributions would mean 
that they are most likely experts in their area, and were 
given points, which promote their ranking and editing 
permissions. We believe this provides accuracy without 
losing	the	benefits	of	collaboration.	Fig.	3	shows	how	to	
process the queued publications and Fig. 4 shows points 
gained by an administrator after several entries. Editors 
can revert to any previous revision in case there is need 
(Fig. 5). 
Fig. 3 Process queued publications 
Fig. 4 Detailed view of editors points 
Fig. 5 Revisions for a publication 
We allowed the researchers to share and discover aca-
demic literature without worrying about inaccurate bib-
liographic data. They can discover what the warm topics 
are	in	the	research	field	and	what	is	significant	to	other	
researchers by viewing what other researchers read and 
tag. Hence, they can know the related researchers with 
similar interest that they can network with. Social col-
laboration is also important for papers that are not avail-
able electronically for various reasons and may loss their 
presence in the research community. 
Social Tagging  
Del.icio.us and Digg are of the best and fastest growing 
social bookmarking sites that use a folksonomy tagging. 
However, inaccurate and misleading tags are common 
in such open environments, which cannot be accepted 
in research communities. This is a classic Web 2.0 prob-
lem:	it’s	hard	to	aggregate	the	wisdom	of	the	crowd	with-
out aggregating their inexperience or madness as well 
(Torkington, N. 2006). 
We prevent these effects by using social tagging with 
light moderation and users privileges upgrading. This 
provides us with a better quality tags than we would get 
if	we	 just	 accepted	 all	 the	 beginners’	 tags;	 these	 users	
may want to contribute to the scholarly community ini-
tially but may loss their interest later on. We allowed the 
users to create their own tags and reuse the previously 
entered tags by them or other users using the AJAX tech-
nology, which allowed us to provide auto-complete tags 
in real time. 
Social review and comments  
There are different types of comments: approving, dis-
approving, or just summarizing the resource. We imple-
mented a feedback environment to build an active online 
research community. It provides social reviews and com-
ments from the users where the authors can interact with 
and answer their questions. 
Multilanguage Capability 
As digital libraries expand their audience and content 
scope, there is an increasing need for resources and ac-
cess tools to those resources in a variety of languages 
(Larson, R.R. et al., 2002). Even for polyglot users, there 
is a preference to use maternal language interfaces in or-
der to accelerate searching and browsing process, prefer-
ring the language of the interface to match the language 
of the content as well (Keegan, T . and Cunningham, S., 
2008). Hence, the CP international scope requires the 
inclusion of content and system functionalities in mul-
tiple languages. Based on the statements presented, we 
provided a translation capability for interface elements 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 122
(localization) and for content (internationalization). We 
analyzed different translation strategies such as using 
Web content (Wang, J. et al., 2004), documents in mul-
tiple languages (Nie, J.Y. et al., 1999), and some avail-
able APIs. After testing common searching phrases and 
sample texts in our content domain in three different 
languages (English, Spanish, and Arabic), we decided 
to use the Google AJAX Language API because of its 
detection and translation capabilities. 
Users can choose the preferred available language at any 
moment while using the system. This choice will trans-
late the interface to that language and would select only 
the content with that language. Bibliographic data can be 
entered in a language and then translated to a new lan-
guage or linked to an existing bibliographic data or pub-
lications	 in	 other	 languages	 (Fig.	 6).	Users’	 comments	
and annotations can be translated to other languages, al-
lowing users to comment and discuss in their preferred 
language (Fig. 7). The testing outcomes showed us ac-
ceptable translation results.
Ranking 
Bibliography ranking has been used as a way to give us-
ers	 a	 confident	Top-N	 resource	 from	 the	 searching	 re-
sults.	A	normal	user	only	reads	the	first,	second,	or	third	
page of results. Citations and references have been used 
as a way to rank bibliography resources (Larse, B. et al., 
2002, Larse, B. et al., 2006, Yang, K. et al. 2007). Cita-
tion-based methods deal with complex issues such as bi-
ased or self-citations, hard to detect positive or negative 
citations,	multiple	citations	formats	difficult	to	handle	by	
computer programs, unfair consideration of new papers, 
venues not considered. (Yan, Su, et al. 2007) propose a 
seed-based measure (considering top-venues and ven-
ues’	authors	relevance)	and	the	browsing-based	measure	
(considers	 user’s	 behavior)	 to	 rank	 academic	 venues.	
However, the authors-seed needs to be updated frequent-
ly to reconsider new relevant authors. We used a hybrid 
approach. We allowed the users with higher ranking to 
rate the publications and retrieve the publications that 
got a vast amount of approved reviews and comments 
since that would mean that they are hot topics. 
Fig. 7 English comment translated to Spanish comment 
Fig. 6 Current publication translations
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  123
Discussion and Future work 
Our initial experimental results indicate that using an 
online social collaboration would improve the quality, 
quantity and usage of scholarly bibliography. Further-
more, it would help in building bridges among the in-
ternational researchers and facilitate scholarly collabora-
tion. 
We intend to automate some portions of the moderating 
process and evaluate the reviews and comments (positive 
or negative) by identifying and interpreting annotations 
patterns and semantic to give some relevance weight to 
each source which would help also in the ranking. 
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-0534314.
References 
CiteULike. Available at:  
http://www.citeulike.org (Accessed October 2008). 
Connotea. Available at: www.connotea.org (Accessed 
October 2008). 
Delicious. Available at: http://delicious.com/ (Accessed 
August 2008). 
Digg. Available at: http://digg.com/ (Accessed August 
2008). 
Drupal. Available at: http://drupal.org/ (Accessed April 
2008). 
Google AJAX Language API, Available at: http://code.
google.com/apis/ajaxlanguage/, (Accessed April 2008.) 
Harnad, S. et al. (2008) The Access/Impact Problem and 
the Green and Gold Roads to Open Access: An Update. 
Serials review, 34 (1). pp. 36-40. 
Hendry, D.G. et al. (2006a). Hotlist or Bibliography? A 
Case of Genre on the Web, hicss,pp.51b, Proceedings 
of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, p.51.2, January 04-07, 2006. 
Hendry, D.G. et al. (2006b). Collaborative bibliography, 
Information Processing and Management: an Interna-
tional Journal, v.42 n.3, p.805-825, May 2006. 
Hull, D. et al. (2008) Defrosting the Digital Library: 
Bibliographic Tools for the Next Generation Web. PLoS 
Comput Biol 4(10): e1000204. doi:10.1371/journal.
pcbi.1000204. 
Jacso, P. (2008). Testing the Calculation of a Realistic h-
index in Google Scholar, Scopus, and Web of Science for 
F. W. Lancaster. Library Trends 56.4 (2008): 784-815. 
Project MUSE. 
Keegan, T. and Cunningham, S. (2008). Language Pref-
erence in a Bi-language Digital Library, Proceedings of 
the 5th ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference on Digital li-
braries, Denver Colorado, USA, 2005. 
Larson, R.R. et al. (2002). Harvesting Translingual Vo-
cabulary Mappings for Multilingual Digital Libraries, 
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM/IEEE-CS joint conference 
on Digital libraries, Portland Oregon, USA, 2002. 
Larse, B. et al. (2002). The Boomerang Effect: Retriev-
ing	Scientific	Documents	via	the	Network	of	References	
and Citations, Proceedings of the 25th annual interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and develop-
ment in information retrieval, Tampere, Finland, 2002. 
Larse, B. et al. (2006). Using Citations for Ranking in 
Digital Libraries, Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE-CS 
joint conference on Digital libraries, Chapel Hill, NC, 
USA, 2006. 
Mendeley. Available at: http://www.mendeley.com/ (Ac-
cessed October 2008). 
Nie, J.Y. (1999). Cross-language Information Retrieval 
Based on Parallel Texts and Automatic Mining of Paral-
lel Texts from the Web, Proceedings of the 22nd annual 
international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and 
development in information retrieval, Berkeley, Cali-
fornia, United States, Pages 74-81.1999. Papers. Avail-
able at: http://mekentosj.com/papers/ (Accessed October 
2008). 
Surowiecki, J. (2004). The Wisdom of the Crowds: Why 
the Many Are Smarter Than the Few and How Collective 
Wisdom Shapes Business, Economies, Societies and Na-
tions. 1st ed. New York: Doubleday. 
Torkington, N. (2006). Digging the Madness of Crowds. 
http://radar.oreilly.com/archives/2006/01/digging-the-
madness-of-crowds.html. (Accessed April 2008). 
Wang, J. et al. (2004). Translating Unknown Cross-
Lingual Queries in Digital Libraries Using a Web-based 
Approach, Proceedings of the 4th ACM/IEEE-CS joint 
conference on Digital libraries, Tucson, Arizona, USA; 
2004. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 124
