“Terminal Hopscotch”: 
Navigating Networked Space 
in Talan Memmott’s Lexia to 
Perplexia 
Lisa Swanstrom
Brandeis University
swanstro@gmail.com
 
If	 the	 reader	 is	patient	enough	 to	make	 it	 to	 the	final	episodes of Lexia to Perplexia, digital artist Talan 
Memmott’s	beautifully	 intricate	piece	of	electronic	 lit-
erature, at some point she will encounter a particularly 
puzzling image. Richly layered with images of comput-
er code, checkerboard backdrops, cryptic prose, and a 
stick	figure	drawn	in	chalk,	this	snapshot	will	neverthe-
less lack the full frenzy of motion of the actual work, a 
palimpsest-like environment that threatens to spin out of 
control. The reader will participate in its wild oscillation 
by moving her mouse around the screen in an effort to 
find	a	gateway	or	portal	to	the	next	segment.	By	this	time	
she will (probably) have learned that this type of active 
searching is the only way to proceed through the text. 
For her efforts, she will not be rewarded with a new sec-
tion, a sense of closure, nor formal dénouement; rather, 
her participation here will involve playing what Mem-
mott has referred to as “terminal hopscotch,” a looping 
sequence	 of	 animations	 that	 unfold	 ad	 infinitum,	 or	 at	
least until the reader will choose to withdraw. 
Created	for	the	trAce	Online	Writing	Community’s	an-
nual Conference in 2000, Lexia to Perplexia is com-
prised of four sections divided into a series of thickly-
layered web pages, each of which leads to further layers 
before linking to a new page. The text is a mixture of 
DHTML and Javascript, which, when strung together, 
forms a fragmented narrative that is visually comple-
mented by empty grids, snippets of code, and cluttered 
signs of death and mourning. Like many examples of 
electronic literature or digital poetry, Lexia to Perplexia 
emerges from a variety of artistic traditions: it is a visual 
poem, a linguistic experiment, and a piece of executable 
code all in one. It is a technological collage performed 
on	a	computer	screen,	filled	with	 references	 to	various	
media forms while settling exclusively on none. 
Yet there are many things that Lexia to Perplexia is not. 
It is not a linear narrative, yet through a sustained inter-
action with the piece, an abstract sort of “story” emerges. 
It does not contain a set series of causal sequences, yet 
any path through this image-laden text is causally depen-
dent upon the decisions the user makes in response to its 
interface. It is not a story in which a single “main char-
acter” functions as a center of narration, yet the piece is 
suggestive of a subjective amalgam, a stitched-together 
entity that has joined itself to a network. Nor does the 
piece	fit	entirely	within	the	tradition	of	the	avant-garde	
in the visual arts—even as its operative and interactive 
features express an unusual sort of seeing, a “networked 
perspective,”	that	resonates	with	Marcel	Duchamp’s	at-
tempts to deter the “retinal shudder” that results from 
traditional manners of representation (qtd. in Ades 70). 
In her detailed analysis of the work in Writing Machines, 
N. Katherine Hayles discusses the manner in which 
Memmott creates an anonymous protagonist resigned to 
a divided and encoded existence that the computer in-
terface and distributed network have made inevitable. 
Her convincing argument is that in Lexia to Perplexia 
“human subjectivity is depicted as intimately entwined 
with computer technologies,” and that such an entwine-
ment	 is	 achieved	 through	Memmott’s	 use	 of	 “idiosyn-
cratic language, a revisioning of classical myths, and a 
set of coded images that invite the reader to understand 
herself not as a preexisting self with secure boundaries 
but as a permeable membrane through which informa-
tion	 flows”	 (50).	 Hayles’	 analysis	 not	 only	 addresses	
the	unique	character	of	Memmott’s	project,	it	does	so	in	
such a way as to shed light upon digital art as a whole, 
providing ample evidence to support the one of the the-
ses that underpins Writing Machines: the increasing need 
for	media-specific	analysis.	
Yet far from exhausting what can be gleaned from Lexia 
to Perplexia,	Hayles’	clear	and	thorough	exegesis	creates	
a new mode of approach. If, for example, it is crucial to 
apply	a	media-specific	analysis	to	works	such	as	Lexia to 
Perplexia, then the task remains to consider more fully 
one of its most important medial features: the organiza-
tion of spatial elements on the level of the interface. In 
this paper I depart from earlier modes of interpretation 
that focus primarily on linguistic elements (see, for ex-
ample, work by Hayles, Dreher, and Raley) by consider-
ing the way Memmott complicates traditional notions of 
identity in Lexia to Perplexia through a unique arrange-
ment of spatial elements that form a networked reading 
environment and suggest a distributed subjectivity. Such 
an arrangement creates an anxious landscape that offers 
no place for repose, one that, at least initially, makes a 
refugee of the reader as she “hopscotches” through the 
text. Additionally, I propose that Lexia to Perplexia’s	
distinct spatial organization results in a form of story-
telling that both challenges and conforms to traditional 
narrative structure—and that these spatial elements, de-
pendent as they are upon the medium of the computer 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 270
and the technology of the distributed network, engender 
new ways of navigating textual space that demand new 
literacies to fully experience them. 
