Testing Authorship in the 
Personal Writing of Joseph 
Smith	Using	NSC	Classification
Matthew Jockers 
Stanford University
mjockers@stanford.edu
Overview
In a co-authored paper published in Literary and Lin-guistic Computing (2008), my co-authors and I em-
ployed both delta and Nearest Shrunken Centroid (NSC) 
classification	 in	 an	 authorship	 analysis	 of	 the	Book of 
Mormon. Our results suggested that several men in-
volved in the early formation of the Mormon church 
were likely contributors to the Book of Mormon. For rea-
sons detailed below, we were unable to include Mormon 
prophet Joseph Smith in our authorship tests.  The work 
presented here attempts to develop a sizeable Smith cor-
pus by using a small set of documents in his own hand-
writing as a training model for evaluating other docu-
ments attributed to Smith but written in the handwriting 
of	one	of	Smith’s	24	different	scribes.	
For the aforementioned article, we compiled a corpus of 
source	material	 from	five	 candidate	 authors	who	were	
involved in the early LDS church. We had hoped to in-
clude Joseph Smith as a candidate, but in the course of 
our research determined that there was not enough reli-
able writing by Smith to constitute an ample sample for 
testing of his signal in the Book of Mormon. As Smith 
biographer Dean Jessee makes clear in the introduction 
to Personal Writings of Joseph Smith,	Smith’s	speeches,	
letters, and even journal entries were frequently written 
by scribes or written in tandem with one or more of his 
collaborators. In another article that appears in the pages 
of the “Joseph Smith Papers” online archive (n.d.), Jes-
see	 writes,	 “only	 a	 tiny	 proportion	 of	 Joseph	 Smith’s	
papers were penned by Smith himself.” In many of the 
documents Jessee has collected, we see the handwriting 
of Smith interwoven with the handwriting of his scribes, 
sometimes side by side in the exact same letter, journal 
entry, or document.   
Mormon history informs us that Smith frequently used 
scribes and that he dictated his thoughts to them. Indeed 
the entire Book of Mormon is said to be a verbatim tran-
script	of	Smith’s	dictation.	With	regard	to	documenting	
his	 visions,	 thoughts,	 and	 experiences,	 Smith’s	 “phi-
losophy” writes Jessee, “was that ‘a prophet cannot be 
his	 own	 scribe.’”	That	 said,	 on	 some	 occasions	 Smith	
did put pen to paper, sometimes alone and sometimes in 
tandem with others. Though Jessee has “attributed” the 
spirit and content of all of these documents to Smith, the 
manuscripts show clear physical evidence of other hands 
at work; thus, the question remains as to whether these 
scribes were “authoring” or merely “transcribing.” 
These manuscripts, though not reliable for use as sam-
ples of determined authorship in our prior research, do 
provide fertile ground for another sort of closely related 
stylistic inquiry and allow an opportunity to investigate 
the	 question	 of	 whether	 Smith’s	 various	 scribes	 may	
have contributed more than simple transcription.  For 
this new research I utilize the models of known author-
ship we developed in our prior work in order to analyze 
the personal writings attributed to Smith (but written by 
scribes).  
The goal of this work is to assess the role (if any) that the 
scribes may have had in shaping the linguistic and sty-
listic construction of these documents.  For example, if 
sections written in the hand of Sidney Rigdon are classi-
fied	as	being	similar	to	the	Rigdon	signal	in	our	exisiting	
model, such as result would suggest that the role Rigdon 
played in the dictation process was perhaps more than 
mere scribe. Alternatively, if the material not in the hand 
of	Smith	is	classified	together	with	material	that	is	in	his	
hand, then this would be evidence favoring attribution to 
Smith and Smith alone. 
At the time of this proposal, preliminary results indicate 
that	at	least	20	of	the	109	documents	penned	by	Smith’s	
scribes	are	stylistically	close	to	those	written	in	Smith’s	
own hand.  Furthermore, early results also suggest no 
apparent stylistic connection between those scribes for 
whom we have known writings and the documents that 
they wrote in the role of scribe to Smith.  Together, these 
findings	appear	to	support	the	historical	Mormon	church	
perspective of common authorship for both the papers in 
Smith’s	hand	and	those	in	the	hands	of	his	many	scribes.	
Further tests, to be completed before presentation of this 
research,	are	necessary	to	confirm	the	veracity	of	these	
preliminary	 results.	 Should	 further	 study	 confirm	 the	
preliminary	data,	then	we	would	have	some	justification	
for attributing a sizeable number of these scribe-written 
texts to Smith.  Providing additional authentication of 
the Smith corpus in this manner would be of great value 
to future studies of the Book of Mormon. 
Methodology
I begin by segmenting the personal documents attrib-
uted to Smith according to differences in handwriting. 
For	documents	not	in	Smith’s	handwriting,	I	label	them	
based	on	Jessee’s	 identification	of	 the	scribe	who	 took	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 152
the	dictation.		From	the	material	in	Smith’s	own	hand,	I	
expand	our	current	classification	model	to	include	a	new	
“Smith” class (the current model includes signals for 
Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, and Parley Pratt who 
were	among	Smith’s	known	scribes).		
Through cross-validation (and testing with various tun-
ing parameters) I determine the most effective number of 
features for a new model. In our prior work, NSC had a 
cross-validation error rate of just 8.8% when using 110 
features;	the	model	accurately	classified	known	samples	
91.2% of the time.  I anticipate similar results for this 
proposed research. 
Using the new model, the corpus of personal writings 
attributed	to	Smith,	but	not	in	his	hand,	will	be	classified	
and the results ranked based on the probabilistic output 
that NSC provides.   The results will provide further evi-
dence as to the consistency of the linguistic signal across 
the corpus and provide a foundation for further research. 
References
Brodie, F. (1971). No Man Knows My History; the Life of 
Joseph Smith, the Mormon Prophet, New York, Knopf. 
Burrows, J. F. (1987). Computation into Criticism: a 
Study of Jane Austen’s Novels and an Experiment in 
Method. Oxford, Clarendon Press. 
Burrows,	 J.	 F.	 (2002).	 ‘Delta’:	 a	Measure	 of	 Stylistic	
Difference and a Guide to Likely Authorship. Literary 
and Linguistic Computing, 17, 267-87. 
Burrows, J. F. (2003). Questions of Authorship and Be-
yond. Computers and the Humanities, 37, 5-32. 
Burrows, J. F. (2005). Who Wrote Shamela? Verifying 
the Authorship of a Parodic Text. Literary and Linguistic 
Computing, 20, 437-450. 
Bushman, R. L. (2005). Joseph Smith: Rough Stone 
Rolling, New York, Alfred A. Knopf. 
Campbell, A. (1831). An Analysis of The Book of Mor-
mon with an Evaluation of Its Internal and External Evi-
dences, and a Refutation of Its Pretenses to Divine Au-
thority. The Millenial Harbinger. 
Cowdrey, W. L., Davis, H. A. & Vanick, A. (2005). Who 
Really Wrote the Book of Mormon?, St. Louis, MO, 
Concordia Pub. House. 
Croft, J. D. (1981). Book of Mormon	‘Wordprints’	Reex-
amined. Sunstone 6, 15-21. 
Hilton, J. L. (1988). On Verifying Wordprint Studies: 
Book of Mormon Authorship. Foundation for Ancient 
Research and Mormon Studies, Provo, Utah 1988. Hol-
ley, V. (1989). Book of Mormon Authorship: A Closer 
Look, UT, Self-published. 
Holmes, D. I. (1991a). A Multivariate Technique for Au-
thorship Attribution and Its Application to the Analysis 
of Mormon Scripture and Related Texts. History and 
Computing, 3, 12-22. 
Holmes, D. I. (1991b). Vocabulary Richness and the 
Prophetic Voice. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 6, 
259-268. 
Holmes, D. I. (1992). A Stylometric Analysis of Mor-
mon Scripture and Related Texts. Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society, Series A (Statistics in Society), 155, 
91-120. 
Hoover, D. L. (2002).  Frequent Word Sequences 
and Statistical Stylistics. Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting, 17, 157-180. Hoover, D. L. (2004a). Delta 
Prime? Literary and Linguistic Computing, 19, 477-493.
Hoover,	D.	L.	(2004b).	Testing	Burrow’s	Delta.	Literary 
and Linguistic Computing, 19, 453-475. 
Jessee, Dean C. (ND). “Joseph Smith and His Papers: 
An Editorial View.” Joseph Smith Papers Project, http://
josephsmithpapers.org/Essays/Jessee.pdf (accessed 
2/25/2009). 
Jockers, Matthew L., Daniela M. Witten, Craig S. Crid-
dle.   “Reassessing Authorship in the Book of Mor-
mon Using Delta and Nearest Shrunken 
Centroid	Classification.”	Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting, 2008; doi: 10.1093/llc/fqn040 
Larsen, W. A., Rencher, A. C., Layton, T (1980). Who 
Wrote the Book of Mormon? An Analysis of Word-prints. 
BYU Studies, 20, 225-51. 
Reynolds, N. B. (2005). The Case for Sidney Rigdon as 
Author of the Lectures on Faith. Mormon History, 32, 
1-41. 
Riley, I. W. (1902). The Founder of Mormonism: A Psy-
chological Study of Joseph Smith, Jr., New York, Dodd, 
Mead, and Co. 
Smith, J. & Jessee, D. C. (2002). The Personal Writings 
of Joseph Smith, Salt Lake City, Brigham Young Univer-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  153
sity Press, Deseret Books. 
Tibshirani, R., Trevor Hastie, Balasubramanian Nara-
simhan and Gilbert Chu (2003). Class Prediction by 
Nearest Shrunken Centroids, with Applications to DNA 
Microarrays. Statistical Science, 18, 104-117. 
Tibshirani, R., Trevor Hastie, Balasubramanian Nara-
simhan, and Gilbert Chu (2002). Diagnosis of multiple 
cancer types by shrunken centroids of gene expression. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99, 
6567-6572. 
Vogel, D. (2004). Joseph Smith: The Making of a Proph-
et, Salt Lake City, Signature Books. 
