The 385+ Million Word Corpus 
of Contemporary American 
English (1990-present):
A new tool for examining 
language variation and change
Mark Davies 
Brigham Young University 
mark_davies@byu.edu
The last 15-20 years have seen the introduction of “mega-corpora” such as the Bank of English and 
the British National Corpus, which contain anywhere 
from 100-500 million words. Until recently, however, 
there have been no large, balanced corpora of American 
English. Only a small portion of the Bank of English, 
for example, is from the US. The well-known American 
National Corpus has not been updated in several years, 
it has only 22 million words of text, and it is quite un-
balanced in terms of genre representation (essentially no 
fiction,	no	popular	magazines,	etc).	On	the	other	hand,	
there are other large “corpora” of American English 
(such as the GigaWord collection of newspaper articles), 
but these represent just one genre.
The situation has changed recently, with the recent in-
troduction of the Corpus of Contemporary American 
English (COCA) (www.americancorpus.org), which we 
released	in	Spring	2008.	This	is	the	first	large,	balanced	
corpus of American English, and it will permit research-
ers to address many questions related to language change 
and linguistics variation, which could not have been an-
swered until this time. The corpus is composed of more 
than 385 million words of text in more than 150,000 ar-
ticles and books, with at least 20 million words each year 
from 1990 to 2008 (and it will be updated from this point 
on	as	well).	In	each	year,	the	corpus	is	divided	into	five	
equally-sized genres: spoken (transcripts of unscripted 
conversation on 100+ TV and radio programs each year), 
fiction	(novels,	short	stories,	and	movies	scripts),	popu-
lar magazines (100+ magazines each year), newspapers 
(ten newspapers from across the US), and academic 
journals (100+ journals each year). The wide range of 
genres means that researchers can study in detail varia-
tion between these genres, and the consistency in genres 
across time means that researchers can accurately study 
linguistic changes. In addition, the corpus is tagged and 
lemmatized (using CLAWS, the same tagger that was 
used for the British National Corpus), which greatly fa-
cilitates syntax-oriented queries. 
Appendix 3. Highly significant differentiations (closet 
markers in bold) among the 100 most common function 
words in 60 tragedies (1580-1641) in 4000 word segments: 
variables that satisfy both t test for equality of means and 
Mann Whitney test.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 98
The entire corpus architecture and interface are designed 
to facilitate research into language variation and change. 
Users	can	quickly	and	easily	find	the	frequency	of	any	
word,	phrase,	substring	(e.g.	suffixes),	or	syntactic	con-
struction in each year since 1990, and in each of the 
five	major	 registers.	 Example	might	 be	words	 such	 as	
carbon-neutral or the quotative like, phrases like perfect 
storm or tipping point,	 suffixes	 like	–gate (Iraqgate or 
zippergate), or grammatical constructions like preposi-
tion	stranding,	zero	relative	clauses,	or	the	‘get	passive’.	
They can also see detailed information on frequency and 
distribution of words and constructions in micro-genres, 
such as the rise of bling in African-American and enter-
tainment-related popular magazines.
The	corpus	also	allows	users	to	find	the	collocates	in	dif-
ferent genres and groups of years since 1990, which can 
provide valuable insight into semantic change and varia-
tion. For example, they can compare the collocates of 
woman or of peace	 in	spoken,	fiction,	and	newspapers	
to see how these concepts are viewed and discussed dif-
ferently in the two genres. They can also compare col-
locates over time, such as the increasingly positive col-
locates with geek since the early 1990s, or the increasing 
environmental emphasis over time, evidenced by new 
collocates with green. Finally, they can easily compare 
the collocates of two words to see contrasts in the mean-
ing or usage of the two terms. Examples might be ad-
jectives with Democrats vs. Republicans (electable, fun, 
open-minded vs. extremist, mean-spirited, and greedy), 
or bias in the collocates with women and men (glamor-
ous, real-life, disadvantaged vs. honorable, self-made, 
and wise).
Other features allow for fairly complex semantically-
oriented searches. Due to the relational database archi-
tecture, we have been able to integrate a  thesaurus with 
entries for 60,000+ headwords, as well as WordNet, 
and	users	can	also	create	“customized	lists”	on	the	fly.	
These allow for rather powerful queries, such as “any 
form of any synonym related to the verb clean within 
five	words	of	any	word	in	the	‘houseItems’	list	created	
by Jones” (clean the pots, washing some windows, the 
floor he mopped) or “any hyponym of emotions within 
five	words	of	a	word	in	the	‘familyTerms’	list	created	by	
Smith (Grandpa seemed to be pretty happy, the excited 
children, the moms that are most worried). As can be 
seen, this goes far beyond most other corpus architec-
tures, which are often limited to just word, phrase, lem-
mas, or parts of speech.
This example of semantically-oriented searches leads us 
finally	 to	a	brief	discussion	of	 the	overall	challenge	of	
designing an architecture that achieves the three compet-
ing goals of 1) size 2) speed, and 3) annotation. Achiev-
ing two of three goals is relatively simple, but achieving 
all three simultaneously – in the real world – is much 
more	difficult.	For	example,	 there	are	many	search	en-
gines that allow fast retrieval from very large “corpora” 
or text archives (e.g. Google or Lucene), but which al-
low for little if any annotation (e.g. even basic part of 
speech tagging or lemmatization, much less integration 
with	thesauruses	or	user-defined	lists).	Other	approaches	
provide speed and annotation, but are completely inad-
equate in terms of scalability – either in terms of size 
and/or speed. There is no limit to the number of propri-
etary architectures that have been designed over the past 
decade or two, and which might work very well for a 
small one million word corpus, but which are utterly un-
scalable. A query might take just two or three seconds 
for a well-annotated 10 million word corpus, but (assum-
ing linearity), that same query then takes two minutes or 
more for a 350-400 million word corpus.
Our approach – which is based on a (still) proprietary ar-
chitecture involving relational databases and a massive-
ly-redundant n-grams schema – is one of just a handful 
that adequately allows for size, speed, and annotation. 
Even a complicated query– involving part of speech, 
lemma, synonyms, customized word lists, and limited 
by sub-genres – typically takes just 2-3 seconds to gen-
erate results from the entire 385+ million word corpus. 
In addition, ours is the only architecture (as far as we are 
aware) that allows for such a wide range of comparisons 
– e.g. across sub-corpora, or the collocates of different 
words. For example, SketchEngine allows comparisons 
between different words, but not by sub-corpus. The IMS 
Corpus Workbench (CWB) allows comparisons between 
sub-corpora, but not between different words. Ours of-
fers both of these, full integration with thesauruses and 
lexical resources like WordNet, as well as much more.
In summary, the Corpus of Contemporary American 
English (COCA) is based on an architecture and inter-
face that allows for a wide range of queries, and which 
does so quickly and easily. In terms of the textual da-
tabase, it is both large (385+ million words, and grow-
ing) and well-balanced (in terms of genres and sources). 
All of these features serve to create a unique resource 
that allows researchers to look at a wide range of ques-
tions dealing with recent changes and current variation 
in	American	English,	which	would	have	been	difficult	or	
impossible to investigate before this time.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  99
