The Apex of Hipster XML 
GeekDOM: TEI-Encoded 
Dylan”1: Understanding and 
Reaching a Community of 
Practice (A Case Study) 
Analysis: 
Lynne Siemens 
Faculty of Business/School of Public 
Administration
University of Victoria
Ray Siemens 
Faculty of Humanities 
University of Victoria
Widget and Other: 
Hefeng (Eddie) Wen 
Dot Porter 
Liam Sherriff 
Cara Leitch 
Karin Armstrong 
Introduction
As the Digital Humanities/Humanities Computing community continues to develop more digital re-
sources and accompanying tools, it is facing new chal-
lenges in regards to creating awareness and gaining ac-
ceptance of these among potential users.  In particular, 
research projects must develop ways to disseminate in-
formation about the resources and tools to ensure that 
they are used and, at the same time, work to understand 
the community of practice which uses their resources. 
Viral techniques and other internet analytical tools pres-
ent one option to achieve those objectives.
Context 
As evidenced by the growing number of conferences, 
publications, and digital resources and tools themselves, 
Digital Humanities/Humanities Computing has been 
successful in their efforts to create useful resources and 
tools.	 	As	 the	 field	 moves	 forward,	 in	 addition	 to	 re-
sponding to new technological challenges, community 
members must address new ones, often beyond their 
typical skills, capabilities and methodologies.  One is-
sue faced by many projects is the need to actively create 
awareness of these digital resources and understand their 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  251
community of practice.    
Among their recommendations, the LAIRAH project 
team outlined that the ideal digital humanities project 
has a clear understanding of their users and their needs 
as well as actively disseminates information about it-
self within the discipline and the community as a whole 
(Warwick, Terras, Hunginton, Pappa, & Galina, 2006) 
This is further reinforced by a recent report focusing on 
sustainability and revenue models for online resources. 
The	authors	discuss	the	importance	of	knowing	one’s	us-
ers and their behaviours in regards to online resources. 
They go on further to highlight the importance of spe-
cific	activities	to	create	awareness	and	usage	of	these	re-
sources	(Guthrie,	Griffiths,	&	Maron,	2008).		At	a	more	
practical level, Cohen and Rosenzweig (2005) devote an 
entire chapter in their book on digital history to the topic 
of building an audience for a digital resource.  Various 
associations within this community are also exploring 
ways to increase the awareness of their activities while 
developing their membership base.
One tool often used by business to promote their prod-
ucts and services is viral marketing or electronic word 
of mouth.  Unlike traditional techniques, viral market-
ing	campaigns	draw	upon	people’s	social	networks	and	
relies on individuals to forward on messages to others 
within their email lists (Dobele, Toleman, & Beverland, 
2005; Smith, Coyle, Lightfoot, & Scott, 2007).  For 
many organizations, drawing upon these individuals can 
also help build the products and services provide by the 
organizations, as Mozilla and Intuit have found (Cook, 
2008; Freedman, 2007) .  While this form of marketing 
is often used by companies to extend their reach with 
their	customers	and	find	new	ones,	it	can	be	a	useful	tool	
for	 other	 types	 of	 organizations	 to	 define	 their	 present	
and potential communities of practice.  But how best can 
the Digital Humanities community use this tool to its ad-
vantage?
Methodology/Steps
To determine the effectiveness of this tool and accom-
panying internet analytical tools within this community, 
a viral experiment was designed to showcase TEI and 
novel ways that it can be used to encode different kinds 
of text.  At the heart of the experiment was a Bob Dylan 
song and its associated video, which incorporated text. 
The encoded text was overlaid the video and posted to 
youtube and a blog with links to the TEI website.  At the 
same time, baseline line data over a four month period 
was gathered to understand the current community of 
practice with TEI.  Data on hits to the TEI website and 
video website were collected to determine the number of 
hits to each site, IP addresses, timing of hits and disper-
sion of hits.
Preliminary Findings
At	the	time	of	writing	this	proposal,	final	data	analysis	
of benchmark and viral experience is being completed. 
The	final	report	will	outline	TEI’s	community	of	practice	
and provide recommendations for other organizations 
exploring similar issues.
Preliminary data analysis of benchmark data suggests 
that	TEI’s	community	of	practice	is	larger	than	anticipat-
ed.		While	TEI’s	82	member	organizations	compromise	
the core of this community, an additional 6,000 users 
visit the website and many download information about 
the guidelines.  Of this group, about 130 members make 
up 80% of the visits.  A surprising portion of this group 
is from non-English speaking countries.
In terms of the viral experience, the youtube video was 
viewed	over	4000	times	and	was	briefly	the	top-watched	
video	 in	 Canada.	 	A	 significant	 portion	 of	 individuals	
then clicked through to the TEI website for further infor-
mation.  Interestingly, several blogs also picked up the 
video and directed their readers onto the video and TEI.
The	benefits	to	the	Digital	Humanities	community	will	
be several.  First, the paper outlines a means by which 
digital resources projects can identify and understand 
their community of practice and create awareness of 
digital resources and tools.  Second, it supports recom-
mendations made by others which advocate the need for 
specific	actions	to	reach	digital	resource	users.
References
Cohen, D. J., & Rosenzweig, R. (2005). Digital History: 
A Guide to Gathering, Preserving, and Presenting the 
Past on the Web. Available from http://www.chnm.gmu.
edu/digitalhistory/audience/index.php.
Cook, S. (2008). The Contribution Revolution: Letting 
Volunteers Build Your Business. Harvard Business Re-
view, 86(10), 60-69.
Dobele, A., Toleman, D., & Beverland, M. (2005). Con-
trolled infection! Spreading the brand message through 
viral marketing. Business Horizons, 48(2), 143-149.
Freedman, D. H. (2007). Mitchell Baker and the Firefox 
Paradox. Inc. Retrieved from http://www.inc.com/maga-
zine/20070201/features-firefox.html.
Guthrie,	K.,	Griffiths,	R.,	&	Maron,	N.	(2008).	Sustain-
ability and Revenue Models for Online Academic Re-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 252
sources: An Ithaka Report. New York, New York: Ithaka.
Smith, T., Coyle, J. R., Lightfoot, E., & Scott, A. (2007). 
Reconsidering	 Models	 of	 Influence:	 The	 Relationship	
between Consumer Social Networks and Word-of-
Mouth Effectiveness. Journal of Advertising Research, 
47(4), 387-397.
Warwick, C., Terras, M., Hunginton, P., Pappa, N., & 
Galina, I. (2006). The LAIRAH Project: Log Analysis of 
Digital Resources in the Arts and Humanities, Final Re-
port to the Arts and Humanities Research Council. Lon-
don, UK: University College London.
[1]Title thanks to the blog thesecretmirror.com
