The Atlas of Early Printing: 
Digital History and Book 
History
Gregory J. Prickman
The University of Iowa Libraries 
greg-prickman@uiowa.edu
The	history	of	the	book	is	an	interdisciplinary	field	of	inquiry that has been emerging for the last decades. 
Scholars of the history of the book use the development 
of books and reading to study larger historical ideas. In 
the digital realm, the digitization of books has received 
a great deal of attention, including funding and media 
coverage, as facsimiles of physical books are created for 
the digital environment. The application of digital tools 
to the broader study of the history of the book, however, 
has been much slower to catch on. This presentation will 
introduce the Atlas of Early Printing, a digital project 
utilizing tools such as GIS data, Flash-driven interactiv-
ity, and 3D computer graphics visualization to transform 
how information about the invention and spread of print-
ing	during	the	fifteenth	century	is	presented.	Rather	than	
a consideration of the digital book, the Atlas of Early 
Printing represents new directions in the digital book 
history.
The background of the project will be outlined by an 
overview of the historical moment the Atlas is designed 
to represent. The printing press was developed by Jo-
hannes	 Gutenberg	 during	 the	 mid-fifteenth	 century	 in	
Mainz, Germany. Following the production of his fa-
mous Bible during the years 1450-1455, printing slowly 
began to spread throughout Europe as the secrets of the 
trade were handed down to apprentice and journeymen 
printers who set off to establish businesses. By the be-
ginning of the sixteenth century, printing was a well-es-
tablished and widely accepted trade, with presses operat-
ing in hundreds of European towns and a brisk trade in 
books increasing in volume every year. 
The spread of printing has been depicted in several 
maps, the most well-known being those in Lucien Fe-
bvre	and	Henri-Jean	Martin’s	L’apparition du livre. In 
these views, the arrival of printing in towns across the 
continent is arranged by decade, showing the broad trend 
of movement but lacking the detail necessary for more 
sophisticated interpretation. In addition, the maps lack 
any contextual information. For an event as revolution-
ary as the invention and adoption of printing, this con-
text is crucial to an understanding of the forces at work: 
what elements in society supported printing and ensured 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 218
its success? What access did printers have to resources 
and markets? How did these complicated factors work 
together to produce the intellectual environment for 
printed	books	to	flourish?
The Atlas of Early Printing offers an interactive map that 
not only animates the spread of printing year-by-year, 
but includes layers that place printing within a histori-
cal and cultural context, such as the locations of paper 
mills, universities, market towns, and trade routes. All 
of these layers can be controlled by users, allowing them 
to view as much or as little information as they choose. 
The site relies on Flash to display the information on-
line,	drawing	from	a	series	of	XML	files	containing	the	
data. Changes to the site can be made instantaneously by 
changing	the	data	in	the	XML	files,	leading	to	a	flexible	
and scalable site that does not require extensive database 
maintenance. New layers can be added by creating a new 
XML	 file,	 without	 disturbing	 the	 information	 already	
present.
The presentation will examine these technical aspects of 
the map before shifting focus to another primary feature 
of the site: a 3D computer graphics model of an early 
printing press (http://atlas.lib.uiowa.edu/press-anima-
tion.html). The model was created in Maya and can be 
rendered in any number of views and animations. The 
technical process of creating a printed page from metal 
type inked and pressed on a wooden structure is essen-
tially foreign to many students and even scholars of his-
tory. While physical replicas can be viewed at several 
museums and libraries around the world, few people 
have the opportunity to experience their operation in per-
son. The digital model brings this esoteric history to life 
in a manner that enables a user to see a press in action. 
Because the press is modeled in Maya, individual pieces 
can	be	modified.	Any	reconstruction	of	an	early	printing	
press	 is	 conjecture,	 so	 the	 flexibility	 of	 the	 3D	model	
allows for changes and variations. Future plans include 
detailed close-up views and, ultimately, a model that a 
user can manipulate in real time online.
This	presentation	will	 also	describe	 the	 site’s	develop-
ment process. The primary goal for the project was to 
create an intuitive, easy-to-use, yet in-depth resource 
with widely available software in a compressed period 
of time. The Atlas of Early Printing was created over the 
course of a year from initial discussion and funding to 
the uploading of version 1.0. The collaborative effort be-
tween different university units that had seldom worked 
together previously, which enabled this schedule, will be 
discussed. 
Finally, the possibilities for future expansion and devel-
opment will be considered in light of the potential that 
digital mapping holds for a broader range of book histo-
ry topics. By applying digital humanities tools and tech-
niques to the databases and image resources representing 
historical books, new ways of capturing and depicting 
the history of books as objects can be achieved. The At-
las of Early Printing is an initial step toward projects 
that will analyze bibliographic data and combine it with 
geographic information systems, to provide methods for 
researching and teaching the history of the book.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  219
