The « Bibliothèques Virtuelles 
Humanistes » (Virtual 
Humanistic Libraries in Tours): 
a Collection, or a Corpus? 
Marie Luce Demonet 
Institut	Universitaire	de	FranceCentre	d’Etudes	
Supérieures de la Renaissance (CESR) 
marie-luce.demonet@univ-tours.fr	
1.	The	goal	of	the	Bibliothèques	Virtuelles	Humanistes	(BVH, or Virtual Humanist Libraries, a digitization 
project begun in Tours in 2003, http://www.bvh.univ-
tours.fr) is to offer two types of digital representations of 
a selection of books printed during the Renaissance or of 
manuscripts: the image of a copy (its “facsimile”) on the 
one hand, and its transcription on the other hand, without 
additions besides corrections or variations that are essen-
tial for understanding the text, and TEI encoding. These 
two goals necessitate the combined efforts of two com-
munities whose objectives, methods and formulations 
are very different. The difference is further complicated 
as the elaboration of a corpus for this period presents ad-
ditional	difficulties:	librarians	and	book	historians	work	
with “image processing” computer programs, whereas 
literature and language specialists use linguistic systems 
(Hyperbase, Weblex, Philologic...). Currently, technical 
progress has allowed these different approaches to come 
together, although they have not yet been combined: li-
braries prefer to offer text-only versions of documents, 
obtained via OCR or by manual transcription encoded in 
order to show a readable text alone or along with its fac-
simile. Linguistic corpora and text databases for works 
before 1800 are often constituted of modern editions, 
which are under copyright and impossible to show next 
to “their” facsimiles—which often do not exist, as they 
were established from several different reference edi-
tions and do not respect the physical presentation. These 
editions have the obvious advantage of easily lending 
themselves to searches for data and to detailed encod-
ing. The goal of libraries of text images is entirely dif-
ferent, as research is generally done only on metadata 
and, at best, on the table of contents which constitutes 
a minimal indexation, and sometimes is done through a 
quick round of OCR. In light of these two traditions, and 
taking into account the reading habits and requests that 
recent navigational tools have encouraged, the BVH are 
devoted to conducting research on the two-pronged front 
of indexing text in image mode, extracting images from 
images of the pages, classifying and indexing them, and 
acquiring	a	 significant	 corpus	of	 transcribed	 texts.	But	
does the collection of texts constitute a corpus?
2. It is revealing that this proposition of intervention is 
on the fence between the two initial themes of the con-
gress and we defend the name of “corpus” for the image-
and-text combination, although it was imposed upon us, 
so	as	not	to	frighten	financiers	and	the	general	public,	to	
call	it	a	“library”.	We	will	discuss	the	difficulties	that	this	
grouping	 engendered,	 difficulties	 both	 theoretical	 and	
technical. The digital libraries as they are comprised at 
the CESR would not be a “corpus”, but rather a “collec-
tion” as their only commonality is their period of publi-
cation,	from	1470-1650,	identified	as	the	“Renaissance”	
in the largest sense, including Antique or Medieval texts 
edited during that period. Even if the collection includes 
broad categories (classics of the Renaissance—sources 
of science—legal and political history—philosophy 
and theology), a priori each book on any shelf could 
fall	under	one	of	these	categories,	all	the	more	as	a	fifth	
category,	“particular	projects‚“	allows	additions	 to	one	
or several subcategories (like the “Rabelais” database, 
the dictionaries, etc.), the only ones in fact that merit 
the name of “corpus”, the rest being composed of stand-
alone books or curiosities. This is how the members of 
the jury of the National Research Agency (ANR) under-
stood the word “corpus” in France, as it is obvious from 
the projects chosen that the notion was relatively vague, 
even as they excluded a collection of digitized texts in 
image mode alone. In order for there to be a corpus, there 
must be text.
3. Going against this analysis, we would defend:
3. 1. The idea that each work chosen corresponds to an 
analysis of its form and its content. The researchers who 
are charged with this (under the supervision of Toshinori 
Uetani, CESR, with the collaboration of Marie-Elisabeth 
Boutroue, IRHT) examine its interest from the point of 
view of the history of the book and of the directions of 
research	that	obviously	reflect	the	options	of	researchers	
at the Center or their colleagues. They hope to render 
the object upon which they are working accessible to the 
scientific	community,	in	order	to	share	knowledge,	going	
against the traditional editorial process that consists of 
offering	a	“definitive”	paper	edition	once	the	establish-
ment	has	finished	it.	Selection	is	therefore	a	tool	of	anon-
ymous collaboration and results from a step that is one of 
a researcher, using available funds (as it happens, those 
of the Région Centre and its partner establishments) that 
they enrich in so doing: the library of the Museum of 
Sologne, in Romorantin, possesses a copy of the 1580 
edition	of	Montaigne’s	Essais: although it is not extraor-
dinarily rare, this state of the text merited being offered 
to	the	public	in	order	to	compare	it	with	that	of	the	BnF’s	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 100
copy (Gallica).
3. 2. The exploitation of image mode, in particular il-
lustrated	elements,	is	specific	to	the	digitized	collection:	
the AGORA program, developed by the computer sci-
ences laboratory of the University of Tours, allows semi-
automatic extraction of illustrations, graphs, portraits, 
typographic material and initials, providing particular 
indexed and searchable databases(notably thanks to 
Thesaurus Iconclass). These “processed” works assur-
edly constitute a corpus which can be subject to precise 
searches.
4. As for the texts, the standard is to accept the name of 
“corpus” for a database that gathers together transcrip-
tions of Renaissance texts in French.
4. 1. But what about texts in Latin, Italian, English, 
Spanish, etc., that are not excluded a priori? A multi-
lingual corpus is all the more conceivable as many Re-
naissance texts contain large fragments of text in Latin 
(the Essais, for example). Even if we initially preferred 
texts in French, originals or translations, leaving to re-
searchers from other linguistic regions the care of de-
veloping	their	own	corpora,	the	fluidity	of	TEI	encoding	
allows the possibility of making a “Renaissance” corpus 
that would not be limited to French and would contain 
even bilingual or multilingual “alined” corpora. Thanks 
to the “TEI Renaissance and modern times” application 
(Tours, July 2008), appropriate encoding of different 
versions of a text makes a model available that renders 
the physical description of a text compatible with its log-
ical description (Nicole Dufournaud, CESR, Jean-Daniel 
Fekete, INRIA). These procedures are taught in a spe-
cialized	Master’s	program	and	during	workshops	open	
to students, researchers and librarians.
4. 2. The progress of “Renaissance” OCR (RETRO) also 
developed in Tours by Jean-Yves Ramel allows the ac-
quisition	of	text	from	difficult-to-read	printed	matter,	and	
it allows correction thanks to form dictionaries compiled 
from transcriptions and in different languages. Even if 
acquisition in text mode with an accuracy rate of over 
97% still represents a considerable cost for these early 
printed books (post-correction is always necessary), it 
allows incrementation of a collection of texts with highly 
varying written forms, processed by an annotation tool 
(Analog, developed in Poitiers and at the ENS-LSH by 
Marie-Hélène	 Lay)	 or	 a	 “dissimilation”	 tool	 (Thierry	
Vincent, Poitiers); these collections in turn facilitate the 
acquisition of new texts and allow for linguistic analyses 
about the uses found with double-checking the text: in 
the context of course, and in the facsimile. It will also be 
possible to search the texts for keywords that constitute 
the Iconclass thesaurus, offering in this way a selection 
of topoi present in the texts, in their tables of contents 
(all transcribed) and in the illustrated elements. 
5. In this way, the BVH is a “Renaissance” corpus that 
is still in the process of being built, a unique but dou-
ble-headed corpus, one that is dissymmetric: there are 
obviously many more facsimiles than transcribed texts. 
Such	a	corpus	is	unified	by	the	metadata	that	harmonize	
the catalogue of the work and that of the transcribed text 
thanks to appropriate descriptors (TEI headers, Dublin 
Core, OAI protocol) and by the search tools that are used 
on the plain text, but also thanks to the keywords as-
sociated with images and with texts, always offering as 
an anchor the facsimile and the reference to the original 
work. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  101
