The Electronic Broadway 
Project
Doug Reside
University of Maryland, College Park 
dreside@umd.edu 
Many of those whose profession or study is now in	 the	 field	 of	 musical	 theater	 recount	 a	 similar	
childhood memory of listening to a library copy of a 
cast album while following along with a printed libret-
to.  Although this is an awkward and incomplete way 
of experiencing the historical works of musical theater, 
it still is the only way many fans of the genre not lucky 
enough to live close to New York can read the text of 
new	Broadway	musicals.		Commercially	released	filmed	
versions of stage shows are relatively rare and do not al-
low for the careful close reading of the texts students of 
other forms of drama take for granted.  The Electronic 
Broadway Project, based at the Maryland Institute for 
Technology in the Humanities (MITH) and funded by an 
NEH digital humanities startup grant, seeks to provide 
a better way of accessing the important texts of musical 
theater for the next generation of fans, scholars, and art-
ists who may even now be pausing their MP3 player and 
rereading a particularly moving lyric.
In this paper, I will describe the technical, legal, and 
scholarly challenges the project team faced and over-
came as we strove to create an electronic edition of the 
new Broadway musical Glory Days.  Glory Days was, in 
many	ways,	an	ideal	first	title	for	our	series	as	it	poses	
many	difficult	research	questions	with	implications	that	
extend beyond musical theater studies alone.  Like so 
many new literary works, Glory Days was mostly writ-
ten using digital tools (word processors, digital music 
recorders, etc) and so the primary sources are, in many 
cases, preserved as bits on magnetic media rather than as 
ink on paper.  The creators kept meticulous archives of 
the various versions of their script during rehearsals, and 
so the work of the critical editor lies in organizing and 
collating electronic, rather than manuscript drafts (a pro-
cess which will become increasingly common in the fu-
ture of editing and textual criticism).  The creative team 
also preserved their instant message and email discus-
sions, thereby creating a record of the creative process 
theater historians of earlier periods would envy.
Further, the collaborative nature of musical theater cre-
ates a situation in which many different parties hold 
copyrights for the component elements, each of whom 
must be convinced to allow access to their work for edu-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 224
cational	 purposes.	This	 is	 a	 difficult	 problem,	 and	one	
perhaps best solved by clear precedents that shift the cul-
tural atmosphere from one of paralyzing fear of piracy to 
an understanding that open access to the texts of musical 
theater can promote interest in licensed productions of 
their works.  The copyright holders of Glory Days have 
generously given us permission to produce a free and 
publicly accessible edition of their work, an act that, we 
hope, will set such a precedent.
Of course, the biggest technical challenge in producing 
an	electronic	edition	of	a	musical	is	finding	an	intuitive	
way to represent and link the various languages (musi-
cal, verbal, and terpsichorean) the form uses to com-
municate.  The web-based interface the project team 
designed will allow the user to have complete control 
over the amount of information available on the screen 
at all times.   Any number of windows containing vari-
ous objects from the digital collection can be opened (or 
closed) as the user requires. Clicking on a lyric or a bar 
of music will start the associated recording playing from 
exactly that point in the song.  Notes in the text will link 
to critical commentary, images of artifacts in the archive 
related to a particular line, or variants in other versions. 
Actors will be able to choose to display only the lines 
and cue lines for a particular character in order to learn 
their lines.   Musicians, in future versions if not in this 
prototype, will be able to play along with a digital or-
chestra that includes every part but their own.
Although our edition of Glory Days will focus on the text 
and	music	of	the	work,	we	will	also	consider	the	difficult	
problem of representing the visual elements of the piece 
and design our interface with this sort of extensibility in 
mind.  How, for instance, does one present a scholarly 
edition of a dance number?  Is there an inexpensive way 
to digitally capture and render motion in order to create 
an accurate transcription of dance in the same way that 
text and staves now encode spoken words and music? 
Because musicals tend to privilege spectacle and are of-
ten developed with the limitations and possibilities of a 
particular theater in mind, the performance space itself 
should be considered a part of the piece, but how does 
one highlight this spatial component of a work in an edi-
tion (electronic or otherwise)?  How should the perfor-
mance of music and dance best be linked to their coded 
representation on scores and choreographers notes?  In 
this paper I will explore such questions and describe the 
project teams best plans for answering them in phase two 
of our project.  
