The Ghost in the Manuscript: 
Hyperspectral Text Recovery 
and Segmentation 
Patrick Shiel
National University of Ireland
pshiel@cs.nuim.ie
John G. Keating
National University of Ireland
john.keating@nuim.ie
Malte Rehbein
National University of Ireland
malte.rehbein@nuigalway.ie
Introduction 
The condition of medieval manuscripts ranges from those that are fully legible to those which can only 
be read in part, and their legibility is determined by 
the manner in which they were preserved and treated 
throughout the ages. In some cases deterioration is due 
to processes such as fading or staining; in others, the 
text may have been interfered with in some way. For 
instance, in the Irish context, the oldest surviving manu-
script written entirely in Irish, Leabhar na hUidhre (12th 
century) was subject to part-erasure and rewriting by a 
scribe who was active at some point between the 12th 
and the 14th centuries. The Yellow Book of Lecan (circa 
1400) was overwritten in part by an antiquarian scholar 
active in the 18th century, while the use of chemical 
agents to enhance readings by scholars working in the 
19th century has had a long-term detrimental effect on a 
number of other manuscripts. Two central research ques-
tions of interest to all scholars, therefore, are: 
•	 To what extent is text recovery in key medieval texts 
possible using current technologies, e.g. palimpsest, 
fading, deliberate removal? 
•	 To what is it possible to establish irrefutable scien-
tific	evidence	for	interpretation	of	questioned	docu-
ments, e.g., identify the different hands (inks)? 
In this paper, we illustrate how to provide answers to 
these	questions	using	modern	scientific	 techniques	and	
emerging forensic technology, i.e. hyperspectral imaging 
[1] and associated image processing techniques [2]. 
The acquisition of a hyperspectral scanner by An Fo-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  221
ras Feasa (AFF), a Forensic XP-4010, has presented an 
opportunity to subject damaged or illegible texts to a 
modern	 scientific	 re-examination.	The	 scanner	 has	 the	
potential to read various different layers of a manuscript 
in a manner not possible to the human eye and to anal-
yse elements of its composition. As such it presents the 
possibility of retrieving text that has been lost through 
fading, staining, overwriting or other forms of erasure. 
In addition, it offers the prospect of distinguishing dif-
ferent ink-types, and furnishing us with details of the 
manuscript’s	composition,	all	of	which	are	refinements,	
which can be used to answer questions about date and 
provenance. This process marks a new departure for 
the study of manuscripts and may provide answer many 
long-standing questions posed by palaeographers and by 
scholars in a variety of disciplines. Furthermore, through 
text retrieval, it holds out the prospect of adding consid-
erably to the existing corpus of texts and to providing 
very many new research opportunities for coming gen-
erations of scholars. In this introductory paper on hyper-
spectral imaging we concentrate on two key processes: 
text recovery and text segmentation. 
Methodology 
The investigative and analytic methods described here 
are based on a novel and highly specialised technique 
called Hyperspectral Imaging. Hyperspectral imaging 
is a non-destructive optical technique that measures re-
flectance	 (fraction	 of	 light	 reflected)	 characteristics	 of	
a document with high spatial and spectral resolution. 
An hyperspectral imaging device records a sequence 
of digital images of the selected manuscript area (with 
maximum dimensions 50 mm x 50 mm) illuminated 
with monochromatic light from a tuneable light source 
from 350 nm (near-UV) through the entire visible range 
and up to 2400 nm (infrared). The value of each image 
pixel in the recorded image sequence represents an ac-
curate	measurement	of	 the	reflectance	curve	for	a	 tiny,	
13 micron square, area on the document. Analysis of all 
spectral curves, essentially a cube of information, pro-
vides information about the physical characteristics of 
questioned manuscripts. 
Hyperspectral imaging, together with modern two-
dimensional spectrum software and three-dimensional 
image and visualisation software, provides modern 
researchers	working	 in	 the	 field	 of	 historic	 documents	
analysis with opportunities for forensic examination that 
were heretofore unavailable. Methodologically, there are 
two	main	fields	of	applications	of	this	technique:	(i)	the	
extraction of relevant historic, diplomatic and palaeo-
graphic information from documents and (ii) the investi-
gation of the impact of environmental conditions on doc-
ument condition and of degradation effects on writing 
materials	and	substrates.	In	particular,	reflectance	curves	
found in different sections of the manuscripts can be 
compared with each other in order to determine whether 
different types of inks had been used during text compo-
sition	or	 to	 identify	modifications	 that	occurred	during	
the	 manuscripts’	 history.	 Light	 spectroscopy	 analyses	
may also be conducted to aid recovery and segmenta-
tion. Fluorescence occurs when an object emits a high 
wavelength (low energy light) following illumination by 
a shorter wavelength (higher energy light) due to mo-
lecular absorption of part of the incident light. Further-
more, the spectral curves may be compared with those in 
international databases containing typical ink spectra to 
determine and date the kind of ink or pigment used. The 
image cube recorded using the technique may be used to 
enhance the visibility of hidden material such as palimp-
sest or erased text. 
This	methodology	for	manuscript	analysis	is	of	signifi-
cant interest to archivists. For example, The National 
Archive of the Netherlands in The Hague recently com-
missioned the development of a dedicated hyperspectral 
imaging	 instrument	 specifically	 designed	 to	 analyze	
archival documents and to monitor their aging process 
during storage and exhibitions. Furthermore, at the 16th 
ICA (International Congress on Archives) Congress in 
Kuala Lumpur from 21–27 July 2008, two special ses-
sions were devoted to the application of hyperspectral 
imaging for historic document analysis and its use in 
providing quantitative, objective criteria for balancing 
the competing interests of document preservation and 
presentation. This proposal is therefore informed by cur-
rent international research and best practice in document 
analysis and textual imaging. 
Example: Text Recovery of hidden text 
Figure 1(a) shows a 16C book cover that has become 
degraded with time and contains mould in places. The 
interior	cover’s	structure,	shown	in	Figure	1(b)	consists	
of an underlying text which has been pasted over with 
a	clean	blank	 faced	sheet	of	paper.	Using	fluorescence	
spectroscopy,	i.e,	light	induced	fluorescence	in	the	pages	
it is possible to reveal the underlying text as shown in 
Figure 1(c) and 1(d). Here, we will describe the underly-
ing	fluorescence	and	reflectance	spectroscopy	principles	
and techniques used to reveal hidden text of this nature, 
and in several other examples. A complete description of 
the techniques used for this particular recovery is given 
in another paper in this conference session. 
Example: Text Segmentation of three 
different inks 
The general objectives of cursive text segmentation in-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 222
clude tasks such as word spotting, text/image alignment, 
authentication	 and	 extraction	 of	 specific	 fields	 [3].	An	
important step associate with all of these tasks document 
segmentation into text lines. In general, this is diffcult 
due of the low quality and the complexity of these docu-
ments, and automatic text line segmentation is an open 
research	field.	 In	general,	 sophisticated	 image	process-
ing of single-image documents is the norm [3].Here we 
describe recent approach to the segmentation problem, 
which we refer to as hyperspectral segmentation; the 
technique is based on the separation and segmentation 
of	differing	inks	by	recording	and	analysing	the	reflec-
tance properties of different inks. This technique is par-
ticularly useful for the segmentation of texts that have 
been edited by various authors over a long time period. 
It is also possible to date the editions by comparing the 
segments with known dates, or using repositories con-
taining hyperspectral properties of different materials 
(e.g. inks, paper, etc.). Figure 2, below, shows the results 
of the technique when used to segment some text with 
two later annotations (giving three primary additions or 
segments). Three different inks are used, although the 
all appear similar in visible light, as shown in Figure 
2(a).	 Figure	 2(b)	 shows	 the	 reflectance	 curves	 for	 the	
two annotations and how it is possible, using appropri-
ate image processing to colour-code the different inks. 
Figure 2(c)demonstrates how it is possible to foreground 
the original text, and Figure 2(d) demonstrates that is is 
possible to isolate, or segment, the annotations. A com-
plete description of the potential for these hyperspectral 
segmentation techniques for dating and segmenting the 
Göttingen kundige bok 2 is given in another paper in this 
conference session. 
Conclusion 
The recovery of illegible or deleted text, the analysis and 
dating of ink-types, and the minute analyses of scribal 
hands, segmentation of cursive test, are activities in 
palaeographic and manuscript studies, and their subse-
quent textual encoding. This abstract describes how hy-
perspectral imaging can be used to perform quality text 
recovery, segmentation and dating of historical docu-
ments. Our paper will provide a complete overview of 
the	 acquisition	 (reflectance	 spectroscopy,	fluorescence)	
, computational and segmentation techniques used for 
(i) a 16C pastedown cover, and (ii) a three-ink example 
typical of that found in Göttingen kundige bok 2. 
References 
1. Chang, C.I.: Hyperspectral Imaging: Techniques for 
Spectral	Detection	and	Classification.	Kluwer	Academ-
ic, New York, N. Y. (2003) 
(a) Exterior Cover (b) Interior Cover
(c) Recovered Text (d) Enlarged Recovered Text
Figure 1. Hyperspectral recovery of hidden text fom pasteboard down
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  223
2. Chang, C.I.: Hyperspectral Imaging: Signal Process-
ing Algorithm Design and Anal¬¨ysis. John Wiley and 
Sons, New York, N. Y. (2007) 
3. Likforman-Sulem, L., Zahour, A., Taconet, B.: Text 
line segmentation of historical documents: a survey. In-
ternational Journal on Document Analysis and Recogni-
tion 9(2-4) (April 2006) 123–138  
Figure 2: Hyperspectral segmentation of sample text –
original and two different annotation inks
(d) Segmented Text – two visibly different annotations
(c) Segmented Text – original minus annotations
(b) Hyperspectral profiles (400nm – 1000nm) of the 
annotations
(a) Original text with two annotations (/ 2 and / 150)
