The Hybrid Future of the 
University Press 
Kathleen Fitzpatrick 
Pomona College
kfitzpatrick@pomona.edu
Numerous arguments have been put forward in re-cent years about the causes and effects of the crisis 
in scholarly publishing, as have numerous more sug-
gestions about ways to ameliorate the situation (one 
might see, just to name a few, Waters (2004), Alonso 
et al (2003), and Greenblatt (2002)), but few of these 
accounts seem to get at the heart of what is, admittedly, 
a very thorny problem in academic publishing today: an 
utterly insupportable business model.  This paper, which 
forms a small part of a book-length project exploring the 
social and institutional changes required to make digital 
scholarly publishing a reality, will not argue for ways 
of creating supports for the existing system (whether 
through subventions, book-buying funds, or other means 
of funding production or increasing consumption).  And 
though it follows the work of authors including Willin-
sky (2006), Borgman (2007), and Hall (2008) in argu-
ing that the future of scholarship must be digital, this 
paper will not argue that such a turn to digital publi-
cation can in and of itself rescue scholarly publishing 
from	its	financial	crisis.	 	Instead,	this	paper	will	argue,	
scholarly presses must consider a far more radical shift 
in their business models, in which they cease thinking of 
themselves as providers of products for sale, and instead 
understand the publisher as a provider of services that 
facilitate	scholars’	interactions	with	texts,	and	with	one	
another through those texts. 
Clay Shirky argued as long ago as 1997 that an inter-
net-based business model focused on the sale of content 
was destined to fail.  The shift from content to services, 
however, might best be understood within the model of 
the “hybrid” economy described by Lawrence Lessig 
(2008).  The hybrid is neither a wholly commercial nor 
a wholly gift-based economy, but rather one that creates 
value for users by offering services they desire, thereby 
encouraging them to contribute their labor to the enter-
prise.  Lessig explores the models established by several 
successful hybrid businesses, including Flickr, Slashdot, 
Craigslist, and others, suggesting that contemporary 
content providers (like the music industry) who have the 
sense that their bottom lines are being undermined by 
network-based	file	sharing	would	do	well	to	consider	the	
ways that their business models might change in order to 
take advantage of peer-to-peer networks rather than at-
tempting to legislate or sue them out of existence. 
The concerns of university presses about the digital fu-
ture are slightly different, but these presses nonetheless 
might take advantage of these same principles.  The re-
lationship, after all, of authors to the university press is 
already based at least in part on the culture of the gift; 
few academic authors earn much directly from their pub-
lished	texts,	instead	benefitting	from	the	jobs	and	speak-
ing engagements that their publications produce.  And in 
the digital age, as Bob Stein (2008) has explored, presses 
will need to think less about selling the content of texts 
they publish, and instead focus on the services that they 
can provide to authors, in the development of their texts, 
and to readers, in providing means of interacting with the 
texts, and with one another around the texts. 
Implied in this turn from products to services, however, 
is a large-scale shift in the relationship of the university 
press to its institution, as explored in Brown et al (2007). 
Despite the fact that most U.S. based university presses 
arose out of the desire of the institution to publicize the 
work of its faculty, most presses today operate on a list-
based model, primarily publishing the work of scholars 
from other institutions, and focusing on a select number 
of	fields.		The	result	is	precisely	the	untenable	business	
model faced by presses, which are expected to operate 
as businesses rather than service organizations (even 
where they are subsidized, if only minimally, by their 
institutions).  Changing the focus of the press from sell-
ing the products of scholarly research to facilitating the 
processes of that research will also require the academic 
institutions that house presses to recognize that a press 
that functions as a service organization within the uni-
versity cannot simultaneously serve as a revenue center. 
I will argue that the survival of the university press in the 
current economic and technological climate will require 
that presses return to their earlier, service relationship to 
authors within their own institutions, in order to more 
firmly	cement	their	position	within	the	heart	of	the	uni-
versity’s	overall	mission.	
In these two respects — in turning from selling the prod-
ucts of scholarship to facilitating the networked means 
through which scholarship is done, and in shifting its 
focus to serving the needs of their institutions, presses 
might learn from libraries — and might, as Crow (2009) 
argues,	benefit	from	becoming	more	strongly	allied	with	
libraries, as one serves the needs of the institution by 
gathering published material from around the world for 
its users, and the other serves those needs by distribut-
ing locally-produced texts to users around the world.  As 
with libraries, however, this new position of the press 
within	the	university’s	overall	mission	will	require	that	
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  107
institutions fund their presses as part of their infrastruc-
ture, rather than understanding the press as a revenue 
center — and, not incidentally, it will also require that 
institutions without presses establish them in order to re-
main competitive. 
This presentation will thus explore not the new technolo-
gies that will rescue the university press, but rather the 
new business model that those technologies will require 
the press to develop, arguing that a focus on services 
rather than products, and a new relationship to the uni-
versity’s	core	mission,	will	enable	the	press,	as	a	nexus	
for new modes of scholarly communication, to thrive 
into the future. 
References 
Alonso, C. J., Davidson, C. N., Unsworth, J., & Withey, 
L. (2003). Crises and Opportunities: The Futures of 
Scholarly Publishing. New York: American Council of 
Learned Societies. 
Borgman, C. L. (2007). Scholarship in the Digital Age: 
Information, Infrastructure, and the Internet. Cam-
bridge, Mass: MIT Press. 
Brown,	L.,	Griffiths,	R.,	&	Rascoff,	M.	(2007).	Univer-
sity Publishing in a Digital Age. Ithaka. First published 
23 July 2007, accessed 17 June 2008, http://www.ithaka.
org/strategic-services/university-publishing. 
Crow, R. (2009). Campus-Based Publishing Partner-
ships: A Guide to Critical Issues. SPARC. First pub-
lished January 2009, accessed 8 February 2009, http://
www.arl.org/sparc/partnering/guide/. 
Greenblatt, S. (2002). A Special Letter from Stephen 
Greenblatt. Modern Languages Association. First pub-
lished 28 May 2002, accessed 28 February 2009, http://
www.mla.org/scholarly_pub. 
Hall, G. (2008). Digitize This Book!: The Politics of New 
Media, or Why We Need Open Access Now. Minneapo-
lis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Lessig, L. (2008).  Remix:  Making Art and Commerce 
Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. New York:  Penguin. 
Shirky, C.  (1997). Help, the Price of Information Has 
Fallen	and	It	Can’t	Get	Up.		Clay Shirky’s Writings About 
the Internet. First published April 1997, accessed 28 
February 2009, http://www.shirky.com/writings/infor-
mation_price.html. 
Stein,	B.		(2008).	A	Unified	Field	Theory	of	Publishing	
in the Networked Era.  if:book. First published 4 Sep-
tember 2008, accessed 1 November 2008, http://www.
futureofthebook.org/blog/archives/2008/09/a_unified_
field_theory_of_publ_1.html.	
Waters, L. (2004). Enemies of Promise: Publishing, Per-
ishing, and the Eclipse of Scholarship. Chicago: Prickly 
Paradigm Press. 
Willinsky, J. (2006). The Access Principle: the Case for 
Open Access to Research and Scholarship. Cambridge, 
Mass: MIT Press. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 108
