The LANCHART Search  
Engine—Making important 
progress in data and data 
archiving reuse 
Michael Barner-Rasmussen 
University of Copenhagen  
mbr@hum.ku.dk
In this paper, we describe the basic design of a multi purpose, multi disciplinary database-driven research 
tool for spoken language research developed and imple-
mented by the LANCHART Centre (University of Co-
penhagen). The LANCHART Search Engine provides 
an open source, highly robust, fast and versatile frame-
work for the entering of, working with/analyzing, visu-
alizing, and not least reusing spoken language research 
resources. 
Secondly, we describe the IS-structures and programs 
supporting the search engine, most notably the creation 
of	import-export	filters	for	a	number	of	widely	used	tran-
scription and analysis tools (presently Praat, Transcriber, 
CLAN).
Last, to illustrate the concrete usability and versatility of 
the resultant e-science tool, we demonstrate by example 
some of the many uses this e-science tool has already 
been put to use by LANCHART as well as by visiting 
scholars. 
Background
The LANCHART project (Gregersen 2009, lanchart.
dk) initially created the search engine for contextualized 
searching in/mining of a very large spoken language cor-
pora presently consisting of ~380 sociolinguistic inter-
views spanning more than 30 years of same-respondent 
recordings. During the course of its development it has 
proven itself an obvious candidate to an e-science tool 
for other corpora of spoken language under the Danish 
CLARIN project (http://english.dkclarin.ku.dk/). As it 
stands the corpus encompasses ~7 M transcribed words 
and ~39 M linguistic annotations.
The LANCHART search engine is a working research 
tool that is supporting more than 15 different thus com-
puter assisted research efforts ranging from phonetic, 
through grammatical to discourse context analyses. 
Architecturally this versatility, i.e. reuse of both research 
data and the underlying enabling technology, has been 
the modularity of our tools and makes our applications 
easier to maintain and modify. 
The BiblioMS engine itself is aware of users (in order 
to record who is making changes to entries and to main-
tain personal annotations and collections) but does not 
provide user authentication and authorization services. 
Instead, an authentication layer provides these services 
by	filtering	access	to	the	HTTP	interface.	The	advantage	
of	this	approach	is	that	administrators	can	configure	and	
control user access on a feature-by-feature basis by edit-
ing	an	XML	configuration	file.	 In	our	current	projects,	
we have used a three level permissions strategy (editors, 
assistant editors, and external contributors) but this im-
plementation allows alternative approaches. 
Conclusions 
Our work offers two primary contributions. First, based 
on our experience with numerous digital humanities 
projects, we have described four key requirements for 
developing a general-purpose bibliography management 
system:	user-defined	genres,	multi-faceted	organization	
and navigation, collaborative editing, and integrated ac-
cess. Second, we have demonstrated our implementation 
of a system that meets those requirements. We plan to 
build on our current work by using this system as a basis 
for studying how large, project-scale bibliographies are 
used both by their editors as well as by their readers. We 
intend	to	use	the	results	of	these	studies	to	improve	find-
ing	aids,	streamline	editorial	workflow,	improve	quality	
control mechanisms, and support user-centric organiza-
tion and annotation of the collection. 
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation under Grant No. IIS-0534314. 
References 
[BibTeX] BibTeX. http://www.bibtex.org/ (13 Novem-
ber 2008) 
[EndNote] EndNote. http://www.endnote.com/ (13 No-
vember 2008) 
[RefDB] RefDB. http://refdb.sourceforge.net/ (13 No-
vember 2008) 
[Stout 2008] Stout, J., Wulfman, C., and Mylonas, E. A 
bibliographic utility for digital humanities projects. In 
Proceedings of Digital Humanities 2008, Oulu, Finland, 
24-29 June, 2008. Univesity of Oulu. 
[Zotero] http://www.zotero.org/ (13 November 2008) 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 66
achieved by stratifying the basic data model into ele-
ments:
•	 topology	or	‘data	architecture’
•	 (analytical) content 
•	 semantic structure(s) 
This separation has long been advocated by prominent 
new media scientists such as Bolter (2001), Weinberger 
(2002), Levy (1998) and has proved rarely opportune in 
the	case	of	preparing	scientific	work	on	spoken	language	
corpora for an up to date e-science.
Data Architecture, outputs and the reusable 
engine
The data architecture is dictated solely by the structural 
elements of spoken language, i.e. it happens in contigu-
ous time, there may be many simultaneous speakers and 
many things (of analytical interest) may happen at once.
These structural characteristics are afforded by design-
ing the data store around two basic entities:
1. ‘Slice’:	a	period	of	time	defined	by	its	starting	and	
stopping time relative to the recordings (recording 
may be audiovisual or audio only).
2. ‘Tier’:	 a	 set	 of	 slices	 spanning	 the	 length	 of	 the	
sample
Fig 1: The relationship between slices and tiers, times and 
analytical content
Each slice may be annotated, e.g. with the word uttered 
or a comment, but only one such annotation may be en-
tered for any one slice. Simultaneously occurring anno-
tations are represented by placing a slice with identical 
boundaries in a different tier. 
Tiers	are	identified	by	a	unique	tier	name	(Orthography	
(AMF) in Fig. 1.) allowing for linking to speaker meta-
data, annotation encoding convention, lists of related 
tiers etc. 
This purposefully devoid-of-meaning data architecture 
creates an environment where most needs of researchers 
of spoken language are met. They may annotate what-
ever, wherever and importantly whenever	(i.e.	as	finely	
grained) as they wish. 
The search engine on its part has two output formats: a 
KWIC	concordance	of	the	finds	and	a	.csv	file	in	which	
the	finds	are	supplemented	with	columns	containing	time	
values, the content of aligned intervals in all other tiers 
and	the	speakers’	background	information.	This	is	then	
used for statistical analyses using programs such as SAS.
Data Semantics and reuse of data
As hinted to above, the semantics, the meaning of the 
annotations in any given tier, is entirely decided by the 
annotator. The unique name of each tier allows for any 
amount of metadata to be linked with the tier, e.g. guides 
and explanations of the contents as well as coding con-
ventions used. 
Reuse becomes the simple task of choosing between al-
ready created tiers: which are of analytical interest for 
the	present	purpose?	Then	create	a	‘package’	with	only	
those tiers present, export this package to one of several 
supported	formats	and	get	started	on	one’s	own	analyti-
cal contribution.
IS structures and computer programs 
supporting the search engine
A	search	engine	is	not	much	of	a	research	tool	if	it	isn’t	
easy to input data for searches, does not scale or if it is 
not well documented, easily customized and written in a 
easy to maintain programming language. 
With this in mind from the very outset, the LANCHART 
Search Engine is developed in open source tools (LAMP, 
Java/jsp) with initial support for the CLAN, Praat & 
Transcriber spoken language representational formats.  
It is also central to note, that the conversion and import 
functions were implemented by translating to and from a 
‘super-format’	instead	of	directly	between	formats.	This	
allows the researchers freedom to choose whatever tool 
suits their situation best and for easy, if not always loss-
less, translation between all formats used both currently 
and in the future – writing new translators is, if not easy, 
then thanks to the architecture surmountable. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  67
Fig 2: The design scheme for conversion and translation 
between formats usable by the LANCHART Search Engine
Ongoing computer assisted analysis / 
e-science using the LANCHART Search 
Engine
Here,	we	mention	but	a	few	of	the	LANCHART	Centre’s	
corpus/e-science research projects (for more see http://
lanchart.hum.ku.dk/reports):
In most detail, we describe the work of Jeffrey Parrot 
who has formulated a project investigating socially sa-
lient and theoretically challenging variation in the pro-
nominal case forms of Danish within the broader context 
of research on the morphosyntax of case in Germanic, 
to test whether variation in Danish pronominal case is 
stable or represents a change in progress. By using the 
analytical tiers already present in the corpus as his re-
search base he can then add his own tiers considering 
factors	 including	attested	pronouns’	case	 form,	person,	
number, conjunct ordering, and structural position as 
well	 as	 including	 speakers’	 age,	 sex,	 geographic	 loca-
tion, profession, and relative literacy. Using the search 
engine to locate candidate concordance sections, Jeffrey 
may jump start this effort. 
Other researchers at the centre have produced works on 
the correlation of phonetic and grammatical variables, on 
bilingualism, and perhaps most notably, phonetic varia-
tion in real time over recordings spanning more than 30 
years (see Gregersen 2009).
The digital infrastructure makes it possible not only to 
study	 the	 influence	of	 geographical	 origin,	 gender	 and	
social class on the use of the linguistic variables in ques-
tion and the possible interaction of functional and socio-
linguistic factors but also to analyse possible correlation 
between the different linguistic variables and between 
linguistic variables and discourse context allowing us 
to formulate and test hypotheses about the origin and 
spreading of patterns of linguistic changes in late 20th 
century Danish.
References
Blanke, Tobias et. al. (2008). e-Science in the Arts and 
Humanities – A methodological perspective in Opas-
Hänninen, Lisa Lena (Ed.) et. al.(2008): Digital Human-
ities 2008. Book of Abstracts. 
Bolter, Jay David (2001). Writing Space: Computers, 
Hypertext, and the Remediation of Print, Second Edi-
tion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Juel Jensen, Torben (2009): “Generic variation? Devel-
opments in use of generic pronouns in late 20th century 
spoken Danish” In Acta Linguistica Hafniensia Vol. 41.
Levy, Pierre (1998).  Becoming Virtual: Reality in the 
Digital Age. Da Capo Press.  
Normann Jørgensen, Jens (2005): “Gender differences in 
the development of language choice and patterns in the 
Køge Project” in Code-Switching in the Køge Project. 
Special issue of the International Journal of Bilingual-
ism 7:4, 2004 (publ. 2005)
Weinberger, David (2002). Small Pieces Loosely Joined: 
A	Unified	Theory	of	the	Web.	NY:	Perseus	Publishing
Gregersen, Frans. Ed.(2009): Acta Linguistica Hafnien-
sia Vol. 41. Language Change In Real Time. Evidence 
from the Danish Laboratory. International Journal Of 
Linguistics (The Linguistic Circle of Copenhagen) 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 68
