The Limit of Representation
Elena Pierazzo
King’s	College	London
elena.pierazzo@kcl.ac.uk
In	the	proposed	paper,	I	reflect	on	the	theoretical	 im-plications and methodology of diplomatic digital 
editions which have arisen out of a three-year AHRC-
funded	project	devoted	to	Jane	Austen’s	holographic	fic-
tional manuscripts. The title of the paper is deliberately 
ambiguous in order to mark the dual nature of a topic 
that applies to both transcription and publication.
For transcription the TEI Guidelines offer a large variety 
of elements to transcribe and describe primary source 
documents at almost any level of granularity and detail: 
“to all intents and purposes”, Driscoll remarks, “there is 
no limit to the information one can add to a text – apart, 
that is, from the limits of the imagination” (2006:261). 
But the availability of an element does not imply the ne-
cessity of using it—and this is a crucial point, as we will 
see1.
For	publication,	Tanselle	notes,	“the	editor’s	goal	 is	 to	
reproduce in print as many of the characteristics of the 
document as he can” (1978: 51). Although this may be 
valid for print, it is of little help in a digital environment, 
where you can represent much more2. This can be posi-
tive, e.g. to avoid most of what Michael Hunter calls the 
“confusion of brackets”3, but it leaves open the question 
of where to stop – a question only made more compli-
cated by the extensibility of the TEI.
Driscoll states that: 
In the determination of how much information should be 
included [in the transcription of a manuscript], the deci-
sions facing the producer of an electronic transcription are 
essentially the same as those facing the producer of any 
transcription (2006:257-8).
However, even if the decisions are of the same kind in 
both media, they may have quite different resolutions for 
a digital edition, as the new medium allows the transcrip-
tion and output of many more features, as I just noted.4 
Nevertheless when designing a digital transcription a 
scholar	needs	to	define	her/his	own	boundaries:
An electronic edition is like an iceberg, with far more 
data potentially available than is actually visible on the 
screen, and this is at the same time a great opportunity and 
a temptation to overdo things. When so many possibilities 
exist, there is a danger of technological considerations of 
what can be done taking priority over intellectual consid-
erations of what is actually desirable or necessary in any 
particular case. (Hunter 2007:71).
But when does stopping imply a loss of information and 
when is it simply wise? More to the point, what is the 
information that needs to be represented and which is 
desirable but not essential? Can this essential informa-
tion be feasibly encoded in the transcription? And can 
it be conveniently represented in the visual output? 
And again, if the edition includes a digital image of the 
source, should the limits change or is the diplomatic edi-
tion altogether worthless5?
The answers to most of the previous questions depend 
on the research goals and the editor better judgement in 
interpreting which feature contained in a source is rel-
evant, and which is merely ornamental: as Claus Huit-
feldt demonstrates, in fact, there is not such a thing as 
an objective diplomatic transcription (2006:194-6). 
Nevertheless those involved with print have been able 
to produce guidelines and lively discussions, while their 
counterparts in the digital medium seem more or less to 
be avoiding the topic6.
According to Tanselle, essential features that need to 
be retained in a diplomatic transcription of modern ho-
lographic documents are: punctuation, spelling, letter 
shape (long s, i-j, u-v, for instance), capitalization, abbre-
viations, authorial errors, deleted readings, added texts 
(maintaining or marking their positioning). In a digital 
framework we can do more than that, for instance we can 
measure dimensions of gaps, distinguish a wider range 
of letter shapes, reproduce the colour of the ink, the tem-
poral sequence of the revisions, etc. On the other side 
Hunter does not hide his uneasiness toward typefacsimi-
le editions, stating that: “the aim is to produce an edition 
which does justice to the content of the manuscript, pay-
ing attention to its actual appearance but not fetishising 
this”, adding, though, that as markup languages allow 
the editor “to have his or her cake and eat it”, it is possi-
ble to push the representation forward and, for instance, 
“if the editor sees a value in preserving the abbreviated 
forms […] they are welcome to do so” remarking though 
that “I would not bother” (2007:85, 80).
The XML markup language, especially when used ac-
cording to the TEI Guidelines, allows editors to encode 
features that could serve for different displays of the text. 
Thus from the same text we can easily produce diplo-
matic, semi-diplomatic, reading and edited texts. We 
can have our cake and eat it. But encoding for multiple 
outputs is sometimes not very easy; compromises may 
be required. In the transcription of Jane Austen manu-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 216
scripts we see, for instance, interlinear insertions being 
placed in positions that do not correspond to logical in-
sertion points: in this case we had to chose which aspect 
to privilege, the semantic of the text or the appearance 
of the source document, the former being relevant to the 
production of a reading edition and the latter for the dip-
lomatic edition.
It is clear that there are limits to the representation of 
documents, and those limits are both conceptual and 
pragmatic. Once the document has been transcribed, a 
certain level of distance between the physical object and 
the transcribed object is inevitable. Hunter again:
different handwritings and letter forms, but also ink blots, 
different methods of striking through words, or exact de-
tails	of	layout,	for	which	only	a	pictorial	facsimile	suffic-
es. The chief thing which a type-facsimile can do is to dis-
tinguish words in pen or pencil, or in different hands, but 
even this might be better achieved by a commentary on a 
photographic or digital reproduction (Hunter 2007:75).7
In fact, no transcription, however accurate, will ever be 
able to represent entirely the source document. Some 
characteristics of the manuscripts are irremediably lost 
by transcribing it, e.g. the variable shape and spacing of 
handwritten glyphs versus the constant shape of digital 
fonts. As Hans Walter Gabler says, “clearly the diplo-
matic transcription is already a distinct abstraction from 
the document” (2007:204). On the other hand, the more 
details we add to our transcription and the more accurate 
it is, the greater the density of the markup, with conse-
quent loss of readability and loss of editorial control over 
the text. Even if stand-off markup can help to address 
this problem, the “cost” of the markup remains relevant.
This paper will use the experience of the Jane Austen 
Project to address the following questions from a theo-
retical and pragmatic point of view:
•	 What cannot be represented in a transcription? 
•	 What can be represented but at too high a price (i.e. 
requiring too high a level of encoding) to be fea-
sible? 
•	 What should not be represented? 
•	 Which features can be encoded but cannot be re-
produced with existing digital publication standards 
(i.e. HTML/CSS)? 
•	 To which display should a given feature belong? 
The paper will open up discussion on essential aspects 
of editing texts in a digital environment by attempting to 
define	a	minimal	shared	protocol	in	digital	transcription	
of documents. The author hopes that many other contri-
butions will follow. 
References 
Driscoll, Mattew J. “Levels of Transcription”. In Elec-
tronic Textual Editing.	L.	Burnard,	K.	O’Brien	O’Keeffe	
and J. Unsworth (eds). New York, 2006, pp. 254-61. 
Gabler, Hans Walter. “The Primacy of the Document in 
Editing”. Ecdotica 4 (2007), 197-207. 
Hunter, Michael. Editing Early Modern Texts: an intro-
duction to principles and practice. New York, 2007. 
Huitfeldt, Claus. “Philosophy Case Study”. In Electronic 
Textual Editing.	L.	Burnard,	K.	O’Brien	O’Keeffe	and	J.	
Unsworth (eds). New York, 2006, pp. 181-96 
Kiernan, Kevin. “Digital Facsimile in Editing”. L. Bur-
nard,	K.	O’Brien	O’Keeffe	and	J.	Unsworth	(eds).	New	
York, 2006, 262-8. 
Robinson, Peter. “Where we are with Electronic Schol-
arly Editions, and where we want to be”. Computerphi-
lologie 4 (2002); available at http://computerphilologie.
tu-darmstadt.de/jg03/robinson.html. 
Sperberg-McQueen, C. Michael. “Text in Electronic 
Age: Textual Study and Text Encoding, with Examples 
from Medieval Texts”. Literary Linguistic Computing 6 
(1991), 34-46. 
Tanselle, G. Thomas. “The Editing of Historical Docu-
ments.” Studies in Bibliography 31 (1978): 1-56. 
Notes
1Sperberg-McQueen 1991:36: “When I observe […] that 
X and Y must be tagged (or taggable), I mean not that 
everyone should be required to tag X and Y, but that any 
general-purpose markup scheme must provide tags to 
enable researchers to tag X and Y when they wish so”. 
2And indeed Robinson 2002 remarks his frustration to-
ward digital editions that do not present “material in a 
manner	 significantly	 different	 from	 that	 which	 could	
have been managed in print”.
3For instance, speaking of square brackets, he says: 
“these have been used for almost diametrically opposite 
purposes – to indicate deletions in the original; to denote 
text lost through mutilations; or to denote editorial sup-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  217
ply.” See Hunter 2007:118-20
4See, for instance the so-called “ultra diplomatic tran-
scription” which integrates facsimile images and tran-
scription, used by the HyperNietsche Project; an exam-
ple of which is to be found in Gabler 2007:205 at http://
www.hypernietzsche.org/demo/bksailehwgabler-33. 
5“The image-based scholarly edition subsumes the pur-
pose of a diplomatic edition and removed the fruitless 
frustration of trying to preserve the exact layout, illu-
mination, and physical appearance of a manuscript in 
printed form. ”(Kiernan 2006:266) 
6But see Huitfeldt 2006:190.
7See also Sperberg-McQueen 1991:34: “What computer 
process are representations of data. […] Representations 
are inevitably partial, never disinterested”.
