Towards an Interpretation 
Support System For Reading 
Ancient Documents 
H. Roued Olsen 
University of Oxford 
henriette.olsen@classics.ox.ac.uk
S. M. Tarte 
University of Oxford 
segolene.tarte@oerc.ox.ac.uk
Melissa Terras 
University College London 
m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
J. M. Brady 
University of Oxford 
jmb@robots.ox.ac.uk
A.K. Bowman 
University of Oxford 
alan.bowman@bnc.ox.ac.uk
Constructing readings of damaged and abraded an-cient	documents	 is	 a	difficult,	 complex,	 and	 time-
consuming task, often involving reference to a variety 
of linguistic and archaeological data sets, and the inte-
gration of previous knowledge of similar documentary 
material. Due to the involved and lengthy reading pro-
cess,	it	is	often	difficult	to	record	and	recall	how	the	final	
interpretation of the document was reached, and which 
competing hypotheses were presented, adopted, or dis-
carded in the process of reading. This paper discusses the 
development of an Interpretation Support System (ISS), 
which aims to provide a system, which can aid the day-
to-day reading of ancient documents, and in future other 
damaged documents, by keeping track of how these are 
interpreted and read. Such a system will facilitate the 
process of transcribing texts by providing a framework 
in which experts can record, track, and trace their prog-
ress when interpreting documentary material. Further-
more, it will allow continuity between working sessions, 
and the complete documentation of the reading process 
that has hitherto been implicit in published editions. 
Introduction 
The process of reading ancient documents is tradition-
ally undertaken by an expert such as an epigrapher, 
palaeographer or papyrologist. The expert uses accu-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 238
mulated knowledge combined with external resources 
to piece together an interpretation of each ancient docu-
ment. Such interpretation is often prolonged, and it can 
be	difficult	for	experts	to	maintain	a	record	of	the	inter-
pretations made whilst undertaking their reading (Youtie 
1963). This is important when disputing interpretations 
and sharing hypotheses with other experts, or pausing 
the reading of an ancient text and hoping to continue the 
same thought process at a later time. 
The Image, Text, Interpretation: e-Science, Technology 
and Documents project (also known as eSAD: e-Science 
and Ancient Documents, http://esad.classics.ox.ac.uk), 
aims to use computing technologies to aid experts in 
reading ancient documents. The project is developing an 
Interpretation Support System (ISS) that can support the 
day-to-day reading and interpretation of ancient docu-
ments. This involves advanced IT tools that can aid the 
interpretation of damaged texts such as the stylus tablets 
from Vindolanda (http://vindolanda.csad.ox.ac.uk) and 
image processing algorithms to analyse detailed digital 
images of the documents (Tarte et al. 2008). 
Background 
Although Classics as a subject has made much use of 
information technology (see Crane 2008 for an over-
view), the use of IT to aid in the actual reading process 
of ancient documents is in its infancy. Terras (2006) 
developed a prototype system which demonstrated that 
it was possible to propagate plausible and useful inter-
pretations of ancient texts, in a realistic timeframe. This 
used linguistic and palaeographic datasets to provide the 
“knowledge base” which could inform a decision mak-
ing system to aid experts in reading texts. 
Decision Support Systems (DSS) have previously been 
developed in the Department of Engineering Science at 
the University of Oxford to aid multi-disciplinary teams 
working with cancer patients in making decisions about 
their treatment (Austin et al. 2008). This system is based 
on a set of rules and allows experts to analyse and in-
terpret digital images while recording decisions made 
about diagnosis and treatment, and suggesting possible 
next action steps. 
Building the Interpretation Support System 
The research presented here, though inspired by the 
above-mentioned medical application, shifts the focus 
from a Decision Support System to an Interpretation 
Support System (ISS). In contrast with medical practi-
tioners, experts transcribing ancient documents do not 
make decisions based on evidence but instead create in-
terpretations of the texts based on their perception. The 
ISS relies upon the idea that an interpretation is made 
up of a network of minor perceptions (percepts) ranging 
from low level percepts such as “these three line frag-
ments are an incised stroke” to higher level percepts 
such	as	“these	five	letters	can	make	up	the	word	‘legio’”. 
We want to make this otherwise implicit network of per-
cepts explicit in a human-readable format through a web 
browser based application. To build an explicit network 
of	percepts	leading	to	an	interpretation,	we	define	an	el-
ementary percept as a region of an image that contains 
what is perceived to be a grapheme. The image can then 
be divided into cells where each cell is expected to con-
tain what is perceived as a character or a space. This di-
vision of the image constitutes a tessellation. A single 
document might be tessellated in various ways and each 
of the tessellations might yield either an interpretation 
or a dead-end, but in both cases, the explicit network of 
percepts will document this. 
The making of the tessellation, which in itself is an inter-
pretive process, marks the boundary between lower and 
higher level percepts. The lower level percepts are based 
on	physical	identification	of	the	features	of	the	document	
(through the application of image analysis methods to 
detect features such as strokes); the higher level percepts 
(words, groups of words) work more towards gradually 
adding meaning to the transcription in progress. Ulti-
mately, an interpretation can then be represented as a 
network of substantiated percepts, which will be made 
explicit	through	an	ontology.	Here	an	ontology	is	defined	
as a model of the concepts found in a text such as the 
concept of a word that contains several characters. 
The ontology aims to make the rationale behind the net-
work of percepts visible and thus expose both: (a) some 
of the cognitive processes involved in damaged texts in-
terpretation; and (b) a set of arguments supporting the 
tentative interpretation. The system will use the ontology 
as a framework to assist the expert through the different 
levels	 of	 percepts	 ultimately	yielding	 a	final	 transcrip-
tion. The transcription is a part of the overall edition of 
which there may be several and it will be formatted in 
EpiDoc style XML (http://epidoc.sourceforge.net/) al-
lowing further interaction with other documents. 
Building the Knowledge Sets 
Much	of	the	knowledge	base	that	serves	as	justification	
for the commitment to a given percept during the inter-
pretation process will come from the experts. However, 
letter frequency, word-and character-lists from docu-
ments such as the Vindolanda ink tablets will provide 
an invaluable source of information which can be used 
to generate the statistical likelihood of patterns in lan-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  239
guage and writing which may appear on the texts. We 
have taken a new approach to the XML encoding of the 
Vindolanda ink tablets based on contextual encoding 
(Hippisley 2005). The Vindolanda ink tablets have been 
encoded with EpiDoc standard XML to a very detailed 
granularity. The contextual encoding which is then im-
posed on the documents consists on encoding words, 
person names, geographical place names, calendar refer-
ences and abbreviations. For example any instance of the 
word pulli (=’chickens’)	in	a	document	will	be	encoded	
<w lemma=”pullus” n=”1”>pulli</w>. This encoding 
provides us with the information that the word pulli has 
the lemma pullus under which we can index this instance 
of	the	word	and	that	this	is	the	first	instance	of	this	lem-
ma in the document. This information has been used to 
generate word frequency lists and is extremely useful as 
a part of a knowledge base to build the ISS on. Further 
knowledge bases will be generated from the marked up 
dataset, to provide uncertainty and character frequency 
lists. Additionally, further work will be undertaken with 
the experts to generate lists of common percepts and 
interpretation making processes. By encoding these in 
XML, the knowledge sets for the system will be in place. 
Conclusion 
The construction of an Interpretation Support System 
for ancient texts, although ambitious, will provide a 
useful tool for those experts who work on developing 
interpretations of damaged documents by facilitating 
and recording the evolving interpretation process. Ad-
ditionally, by making explicit the percepts which trigger 
such transcriptions of ancient documents, we will further 
our knowledge of the reasoning process undertaken by 
experts in propagating readings of ancient documents. 
Furthermore, the successful development of an image 
and language based Interpretation Support System will 
provide a set of tools which can be adopted and adapted 
by other domains which rely on detailed analysis and in-
terpretation of image based material. 
References 
Austin,	M.,	Kelly,	M.,	Brady	M.	(2008),	“The	benefits	
of an ontological patient model in clinical decision-sup-
port”. In Fox, D. and Gomes, C. P. (eds), AAAI, pages 
1774–1775. AAAI Press. 
Crane, G. (2008) “Classics and the Computer: An End 
of the History”. In Schreibman, S., Siemens, R., and 
Unsworth, J. (eds). A Companion to Digital Humanities. 
Blackwell Companions to Literature and Culture. Black-
well. http://www.digitalhumanities org/companion/vie
w?docId=blackwell/9781405103213/9781405103213.
xml &chunk.id=ss1-2-4&toc.depth=1&toc.id=ss1-2-
4&brand=default 
Hippisley, D. (2005) “Encoding the Vindolanda tablets: 
an investigation in contextual encoding using XML and 
the EpiDoc standards.” MA Dissertation submitted for 
the MA in Electronic Communication and Publishing, 
School of Library, Archive and Information Studies, 
UCL. 
Tarte, S. M., Brady, J. M., Roued Olsen, H., Terras, M., 
Bowman, A. K. (2008), “Image Acquisition and Analysis 
to Enhance the Legibility of Ancient Texts”. UK e-Sci-
ence Programme All Hands Meeting 2008 (AHM2008), 
Edinburgh, September 2008. 
Terras, M. (2006).”Image to Interpretation: Intelligent 
Systems to Aid Historians in the Reading of the Vindol-
anda Texts”. Oxford Studies in Ancient Documents. Ox-
ford University Press. 
Youtie,	 H.	 C.	 (1963):	 “The	 Papyrologist:	 Artificer	 of	
Fact”. GRBS 4 (1963), p. 19-32. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 240
