Translation and Delta Revisited: 
When We Read Translations, Is 
It the Author or the Translator 
that We Really Read?
Jan Rybicki
Pedagogical University, Cracow, Poland 
jkrybicki@gmail.com
One	of	 the	first	 success	 stories	of	Burrows’s	Delta,	that	of	the	‘Englishing	of	Juvenal,’	strongly	points	
out that some translators, such as Johnson, translate 
other	people’s	writing	as	if	they	were	writing	their	own	
work, while others, such as Dryden, are ‘able to conceal 
their	hand’	(Burrows	2002,	2002a).	Previous	stylometric	
studies of patterns in multivariate diagrams of correla-
tion matrices derived from relative frequencies of most 
frequent words in character idiolects (Burrows 1987) in 
a number of originals and translations (Rybicki 2006, 
2006a, 2007, 2008) have shown that while some stylo-
metric tools can show the difference between translator 
and translator, the relationship between such patterns 
between original and translation is at best unclear – as 
unclear, one could say, as is the relationship between the 
lists of most-frequent-words in two (or more) languages, 
where one-on-one correspondences are rare if not non-
existent.
In	 the	first-mentioned	pioneering	 study,	Burrows	com-
pared translations by a variety of authors to their own 
writing – a very natural material for translations of po-
etry, itself very much the domain of poets. But transla-
tions of prose are usually done by men and women who 
often are not novelists in their own right; while there is 
a	reasonable	guarantee	that	a	Dryden	or	a	Miłosz	trans-
lation,	however	 ‘unfaithful’	or	 ‘free’,	can	still	be	good	
poetry, can one really trust that a novel translated into 
another language by someone who has never invented 
a plot line of his/her own can be at least remotely con-
nected	 to	 the	original	 in	 terms	of	 such	 trifling	 features	
as… literary style? Or, in other words, whose style is it 
that we see in the translation: some foreign version of the 
original	author’s,	or	simply	that	of	the	much	less	talented	
translator?	For,	obviously,	Kurt	Vonnegut’s	requirement	
for a perfect translator (‘that he or she be a more gifted 
writer than I am, and in at least two languages, one of 
them	mine,’	Vonnegut,	1991)	is	rarely	met,	and	probably	
never in translations of prose. In fact, traditional (i.e. 
non-computer- and/or non-statistically-assisted) transla-
tion	studies	speak	of	‘inherent	intersubjective	processes,’	
which	 result	 in	 an	 ‘unpredictability	of	 the	 target	 style’	
(Wilss, 1996).
The	 above	 also	 signifies	 that	 any	 study	 venturing	 into	
these uncharted waters is deprived of exactly the ideal 
comparative	material	Burrows	could	use	in	his	‘Juvenal;’	
and that the best one can count on are other translations 
by the same translator, or other translations of the same 
author by other translators; if in luck, one can sometimes 
use different translations of the same novel. In this con-
text, the main question of the title boils down to wheth-
er different works of an author translated by the same 
translator are going to be stylometrically more similar to 
each other than to translations by that translator of other 
authors; and whether translations of one author by many 
translators are going to resemble each other rather than 
translations of other individual authors by these transla-
tors.
Two discrete material sets have been used in this study. 
The	first	is	a	collection	of	21	Polish	translations	of	Eng-
lish-language	 fiction	 by	 Rybicki,	 made	 between	 1991	
and the present, with two authors appearing more than 
once: John le Carré (5 different novels) and Douglas 
Coupland (3). The second consists of 10 Polish transla-
tions	of	Jane	Austen’s	novels	by	4	different	translators,	
produced between 1956 and 2006, and compared to 5 
other translations by the same translators (at least 1 by 
each).
Fig. 1 Cluster Analysis of all Rybicki translations
Both sets have been subjected to testing by three dif-
ferent	 tools:	Principal	Component	Analysis,	Burrows’s	
Delta	 (including	 Hoover’s	 and	 Argamon’s	 significant	
modifications	such	as	DeltaOz,	 resulting	 in	 the	power-
ful set of Delta spreadsheets, Hoover 2004, 2004a, 2007, 
2007a, Argamon, 2008), and the recent black box soft-
ware, JGAAP 3.3 (Juola et al., 2006, 2008), still in demo 
version.	For	the	first	two	tools,	various	combinations	of	
‘culling,’	 wordlist	 lengths	 and	 primary	 and	 secondary	
test groups have been used; in the third, which presents a 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 246
variety	of	‘events’	and	statistical	method	combinations,	
those deemed the most reliable by the makers of JGAAP 
were used.
In	 the	first	 set,	 all	 three	methods	 clearly	 highlighted	 a	
great	similarity	of	the	five	Rybicki	translations	of	le	Car-
ré. Multivariate Analysis graphs (Cluster Analysis, Fac-
tor Analysis and Multidimensional Scaling) always con-
tained a visible (yet not exclusive) cluster of this author 
(as	 exemplified	 in	 Fig.	 1).	A	 huge	majority	 of	 various	
combinations of wordlist size, pronoun deletion, culling 
percentage, primary and secondary text selection, and 
Delta	variety,	correctly	identified	translations	of	le	Carré	
from among all other Rybicki translations (the infrequent 
yet rule-proving exception being that of Barris, whose 
Confessions of a Dangerous Mind can be seen as a par-
ody of the spy thriller genre, and who twice preceded le 
Carré, himself ranked second, as the most likely author 
of the original). In contrast, the three Coupland books 
exhibited much less stylistic consistency – a possible 
consequence	of	the	significant	time	that	had	elapsed	be-
tween the three translations. On the other hand, given the 
choice of only le Carré and Coupland as primary authors, 
Delta	invariably	identified	all	of	their	translated	novels	
correctly and refused to mistake them for any of the sec-
ondary authors – and that at a very wide range of most-
frequent-word lists. A very similar pattern emerged from 
some of the more robust statistical procedures available 
in JGAAP (word analyses with Kolmogorov-Smirnov 
Distance and Manhattan Distance).
Fig. 2 Multidimensional Scaling Analysis of translations of 
Austen (uppercase initials) and of other original writers by 
the same translators (lowercase)
In the second set, multivariate graphs contained a vis-
ible cluster of all translations of Austen novels by all 
four translators, while their other translations hovered 
away from the cluster in other parts of the graph (Fig. 2). 
This was even more obvious in Delta analyses, where all 
Austen novels in Polish, irrespective of their translators, 
were	almost	always	correctly	identified	as	Austen	novels	
(in 9 out of 9 cases at various combinations of param-
eters, Table 1). Conversely, standard Delta and DeltaOz 
never exceeded a 5/11 correctness ratio when asked to 
tell translator from translator (Table 2). Faced with an 
Austen text by translator A, JGAAP almost invariably 
chose a translation of any Austen novel by translator A or 
B, rather than a translation of another author by transla-
tor A, as the more similar of the two.
Table 1. Correctness of Delta attributions of Austen novels 
in 9 Polish translations 
Table 2. Correctness of Delta attributions of 11 
translations to translators
The conclusions from this study are twofold. First, the 
results – reliable, because they were obtained using three 
tools using a variety of statistical calculations (tradition-
al multivariate analysis, state-of-the-art Delta, and the 
emerging JGAAP black box with its various distances) 
–	are	an	interesting	addition	to	Burrows’s	study	of	the	Ju-
venal translations. The fact that translations of prose tend 
to	‘disguise’	the	individual	styles	of	the	translators	and	
seem to create individual styles of the original authors 
in a foreign language – styles common to a number of 
different translators even more consistently than trans-
lations of poetry – can be a consequence of the greater 
formal complexities of poetic translation, which usually 
calls for the task to be done by literary creators in their 
own right – exactly such as the translators studied by 
Burrows. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, the 
fact	that	‘unpredictable	target	style’	is	in	fact	predictably	
similar between translations of the same original author 
done by many people – as measured on the basis of fre-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  247
quent and very frequent words (additionally culled to 
eliminate individual word-types characteristic for the vo-
cabulary of individual novels and translators) – suggests 
possible	 and	previously	unsuspected	affinities	between	
original	 and	 translation	 at	 very	 ‘mechanical’	 levels	 of	
the text. Indeed, since many of these words – especially 
those at higher frequencies – carry grammatical rather 
than lexical meaning, there is hope on the horizon that 
one day computational stylistics and cognitive linguis-
tics (and particularly cognitive translation studies) might 
be two sides, experimental and theoretical, respectively, 
of the same phenomenon – as has already been suggest-
ed by Connors (2006, 2008).
References
Argamon, S.	 (2008).	 ‘Interpreting	 Burrows’s	 Delta:	
Geometric	and	Probabilistic	Foundations,’	Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 23(2): 131-147.
Burrows, J. F. (1987). Computation into Criticism: 
A Study of Jane Austen’s Novels and an Experiment in 
Method, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Burrows, J. F. (2002). ‘The Englishing of Juvenal: 
Computational	Stylistics	and	Translated	Texts,’	Style 36: 
677-99.
Burrows, J. F. (2002a). ‘”Delta”: A Measure of Stylistic 
Difference	and	a	Guide	to	Likely	Authorship,’	Literary 
and Linguistic Computing 17: 267-287.
Connors, L. (2006).  ‘An Unregulated Woman: A Com-
putational	 Stylistic	 Analysis	 of	 Elizabeth	 Cary’s	 The 
Tragedy of Mariam, The Faire Queene of Jewry,’	Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing 21(Supplementary Issue): 
55-66.
Connors, L. (2006).  ‘Function Word Analysis and 
Questions	 of	 Interpretation	 in	 Early	Modern	Tragedy,’	
Oulu: Digital Humanities 2008.
Hoover, D. L. (2004) ‘Testing	Burrows’s	Delta,’	Liter-
ary and Linguistic Computing 19: 453-475. 
Hoover, D. L.	(2004a)	‘Delta	Prime?’	Literary and Lin-
guistic Computing 19: 477-495 
Hoover, D. L. (2007). ‘Corpus Stylistics, Stylometry, 
and	the	Styles	of	Henry	James,’	Style 41(2): 174-203. 
Hoover, D. L. (2007a). ‘Quantitative Analysis and Liter-
ary	Studies,’	A Companion to Digital Literary Studies, 
Oxford: Blackwell, 517-33. 
Rybicki, J. (2000). A Computer-Assisted Comparative 
Analysis of Henryk Sienkiewicz’s Trilogy and its Two 
English Translations. PhD thesis, Kraków: Akademia 
Pedagogiczna.
Rybicki, J. (2006). ‘Burrowing into Translation: Char-
acter	 Idiolects	 in	Henryk	Sienkiewicz’s	Trilogy	and	 its	
Two	English	Translations,’	Literary and Linguistic Com-
puting 21(1): 91-103.
Rybicki, J.	 (2006a).	 ‘Can	 I	Write	 like	 John	 le	Carré?’	
Paris: Digital Humanities 2006.
Rybicki, J. (2007). ‘Twelve Hamlets: A Stylometric 
Analysis	of	Major	Characters’	Idiolects	in	Three	English	
Versions	 and	 Nine	 Translations,’	 Urbana-Champaign:	
Digital Humanities 2007.
Rybicki, J. (2008). ‘Does Size Matter? A Re-evaluation 
of	 a	 Time-proven	 Method,’	 Oulu:	 Digital	 Humanities	
2008.
Vonnegut, K. (1991). Fates Worse than Death, New 
York: Berkley Trade, 181.
Wilss, W. (1996). Knowledge and Skills in Translator 
Behaviour, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 34-5.
Juola, P., Noecker, J., Ryan, M., and Zhao, M. (2008). 
‘JGAAP3.0	--	Authorship	Attribution	for	the	Rest	of	Us,’	
poster, Oulu: Digital Humanities 2008.
Juola, P., Sofko, J. and Brennan, P. (2006). ‘A Pro-
totype	for	Authorship	Attribution	Studies,’	Literary and 
Linguistic Computing 21:169-178.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 248
