Visualization and Landscape in 
the Digital Humanities 
John Melson 
Brown University 
John_Melson@brown.edu
What does “landscape” mean for digital humani-ties?	 In	 the	fields	of	 traditional	 literary	 and	cul-
tural studies, representations of real and imagined 
landscapes have routinely been scrutinized as windows 
into particular cultural moments, spaces in which com-
plex relationships between humans in their natural and 
constructed environments are worked out and assigned 
social, political, and cultural meaning. Digital humani-
ties have developed a rather different sense of the term, 
however. Maps of the publication and circulation of 
printed texts, spatial visualizations of historical urban 
plans, three-dimensional reconstructions of archeologi-
cal sites: all these and more have now attained the status 
of “landscapes” in the digital humanities, for they situate 
texts and cultural artifacts in space and time. Yet even as 
such technology-driven approaches continually reshape 
the “humanities research landscape” (to use the term in a 
different sense) they also raise new questions about the 
kinds of intellectual activities they promote, testing what 
Martyn Jessop has recently called the “dynamic process” 
of creating knowledge (Edmond 2005; Jessop 2008). 
This	paper	explores	the	changing	significance	of	“land-
scape” as a keyword in the humanities, one whose rel-
evance	 is	 amplified	 dramatically	 by	 the	 turn	 toward	
technologies of visualization and the development of 
theoretical and methodological frameworks for integrat-
ing such technologies into more conventional forms of 
textual scholarship. Using as a test case a small set of 
eighteenth-century Anglophone texts that theorize land-
scape aesthetics and deploy tropes of real and imagined 
landscapes	to	reflect	on	contemporary	cultural	relations	
across the Atlantic, I argue that methods for representing 
some of their salient features in visual rather than textual 
forms suggest new ways of understanding cultural ex-
change in a historical moment characterized by intense 
anxieties about the temporal and spatial distances sepa-
rating England from its North American colonies during 
the “British diaspora” (Tennenhouse 2007). This claim, 
and	 the	 specific	 visual	 representations	 that	 support	 it,	
forms the basis for considering how models of textually-
mediated cultural authority were themselves constructed 
at the nexus of space and time represented by landscape 
aesthetics. This latter claim extends what might initially 
seem to be a straightforward literary and historical argu-
ment to the present moment in digital humanities. Ex-
amining these cultural constructions through the lens of 
digital visualizations affords insight into the present-day 
relationship	between	scholars’	 interpretive	acts	and	 the	
cultural weight we grant such activities when they hap-
pen in and through digital media. 
In 1690, a short tract titled The Geometry of Landskips 
and Paintings Made Familiar and Easie, published in 
London,	noted	the	artifice	involved	in	landscape	repre-
sentation: “The Geometry of Painting is rather Optick 
or Perspective, than real…A Landskip is therefore a 
rather neat contraction or Epitome of things visible than 
a real view of them.” Though somewhat cryptic, the 
anonymous	pamphleteer’s	opening	 remarks	expose	 the	
carefully	crafted	fiction	 that	 landscape	paintings	 repre-
sent real places as they actually are; to the contrary, he 
insists, landscapes are deliberately compressed expres-
sions of an idealized, imaginary world—the world as we 
would	like	to	see	it.	In	this	regard,	the	pamphlet’s	frank	
admission	of	the	ideal	landscape’s	constructedness	con-
firms	the	common	view	among	literary	scholars	and	cul-
tural historians that textual and visual landscapes have 
historically naturalized ideologies of power and author-
ity within the contours of real and imagined geographic 
space (Barrell 1972, 1980; Bermingham 1986; Williams 
1973). 
Yet	 the	 pamphlet’s	 titular	 promise	 to	 make	 landscape	
“Familiar	 and	 Easie”	 resonates	 also	 with	 this	 paper’s	
examination of the present-day digital humanities “land-
scape,” and particularly the role of visualization in ad-
vancing both close and “distant” reading practices. With 
calls in some quarters for “a new object of study…in 
which the reality of the text undergoes a process of de-
liberate reduction and abstraction,” and with the increas-
ing conviction that text visualizations furnish that object, 
the question of graphical and visual literacy has become 
all the more pressing (Moretti 2000). As Jessop notes, 
“Humanists… have little in the way of visual literacy,” 
an observation which leads him to conclude that collabo-
ration between digital humanities projects and artists is 
necessary in recognition of the fact that “aesthetics are 
deeply embedded in the effective use of the medium of 
digital visualization” (Jessop 2008). That visual literacy 
is no more “familiar” or “easy” for many now than it was 
at the end of the seventeenth century suggests that the 
historical evolution and function of landscape has much 
to teach us about the current promises and pitfalls of hu-
manities visualization. 
It	is	on	this	point	that	my	paper’s	examination	of	visual-
izing patterns of reference in a small set of eighteenth-
century Anglo-American texts advocates the useful-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 202
ness of thinking in broader terms about “the digital” as 
a landscape in its own right—a landscape that exposes 
rather than conceals its own constructedness and, in so 
doing, reveals new modes of legitimating and authoriz-
ing the scholarly activities to which it belongs. In other 
words, by regarding visualizations as composing an-
other kind of landscape it becomes possible to ask how 
digital humanities, in the process of collecting, shaping, 
and presenting textual data, themselves participate in 
what amounts to a regime of aesthetic judgment. Like 
the landscape aesthetics of the eighteenth century, the 
interpretive lexicon authorized by digital visualization 
raises new questions about scholarly authority, models 
of judgment, standards of evidence—indeed, questions 
not only of how we read and interpret texts but also who 
is authorized to read them in particular ways. The idea 
of landscape has historically been deeply involved in 
negotiating the transmission of cultural authority. Its re-
newed	 formal	 significance	 for	 scholars	 grappling	with	
the relationship between quantitative textual or spatial 
data and the “fuzziness” of highly subjective interpretive 
practices (to mention but one scenario) in which, once 
again, authority is stake, is therefore highly germane to 
the methodologies that inform scholarly practice at the 
intersection of digital and non-digital humanistic inquiry. 
References 
Anonymous. (1690). The Geometry of Landskips and 
Paintings Made Familiar and Easie. London: Richard 
Baldwin. 
Barrell, J. (1980). The Dark Side of the Landscape: The 
Rural Poor in English Painting, 1730-1840. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Barrell, J. (1972). The Idea of Landscape and the Sense 
of Place, 1730-1840: An Approach to the Poetry of John-
Clare. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Bermingham, A. (1986). Landscape and Ideology: The 
English Rustic Tradition, 1740-1860.  Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press. 
Edmond, J. (2005). The Role of the Professional Inter-
mediary in Expanding the Humanities Computing Base. 
Literary and Linguistic Computing, 20: 367-380. 
Jessop, M. (2008). Digital Visualization as a Scholarly 
Activity. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 23: 281-
293. 
Moretti, F. (2000). Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Mod-
els for a Literary Theory. New York: Verso. 
Tennenhouse, L. (2007). The Importance of Feeling 
English: American Literature and the British Diaspora, 
1750-1850. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Williams, R. (1973). The Country and the City. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  203
