WikiPhiloSofia:	Extraction	and	
Visualization of Facts, Relations, 
and Networks Concerning 
Philosophers Using Wikipedia
Sofia	J.	Athenikos 
Drexel University
sofia.j.athenikos@acm.org
Xia Lin 
Drexel University 
xlin@cis.drexel.edu
Due to its unique structural features and rich user-generated content, Wikipedia is being increasingly 
recognized as a useful knowledge resource that can be 
exploited for various applications. Nevertheless, the 
mode of information search and retrieval on Wikipedia 
remains that of conventional keyword-based search and 
retrieval of a list of articles ranked in terms of keyword 
matching. The objective of the ongoing project reported 
in this paper is to create a Web-based knowledge portal 
using the data extracted from Wikipedia, for the sake of 
enabling semantics-based search and exploration. The 
methodology is currently applied to the philosophy do-
main.	Hence	 the	project	name:	WikiPhiloSofia.	 In	 this	
paper we present extraction and visualization of the facts, 
relations, and networks involving 300 major philoso-
phers as obtained from Wikipedia and we partially com-
pare the results against those obtained by using Thomson 
Reuters’	Arts	&	Humanities	Citation	Index	data.	Insofar	
as the work aims at enabling semantics-based search and 
exploration by exploiting the user-generated content, it 
embodies the movement toward Web 3.0, i.e., the con-
vergence of the Social Web (Web 2.0) and the Semantic 
Web. Insofar as it emphasizes information visualization 
for	the	sake	of	enhancing	the	user’s	information	seeking	
experience at the aesthetic level as well as at the cogni-
tive level, however, the work also embodies the trend 
toward information aesthetics. As such, the WikiPhi-
loSofia	 project	 serves	 as	 a	 venue	 of	 the	 convergence	
of arts, humanities, and computer/information science/
technology, contributing to a paradigm shift toward the 
next generation of online search, retrieval, and delivery 
of digital information in the humanities.   
Introduction
Philosophy (and here we mean Western philosophy), 
dating back at least to approximately 600 BC, is one of 
the oldest of all academic disciplines and is, in particu-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  57
lar, one of the core disciplines in the humanities. Partly 
due to its long history, and partly due to the nature of 
the discipline itself, the domain of philosophy presents 
a rich semantic network involving an extended geneal-
ogy of philosophers and related philosophical concepts, 
ideas, and doctrines, which can be explored and exam-
ined from diverse perspectives. 
Wikipedia (http://www.wikipedia.org) is an open-access, 
collaborative Web encyclopedia project, initiated by 
Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger in 2001. Wikipedia has 
since grown rapidly to become one of the most sought-
after resources on the Web. Due to its collaborative way 
of construction and due to its impressive size and growth 
rate, Wikipedia is considered a foremost example of Web 
2.0 applications.
The objective of the ongoing project reported here, en-
titled	WikiPhiloSofia	(formerly	known	as	The	WikiPhil	
Portal), is to extract, analyze, and visualize meaningful 
and interesting facts, relations, and connections among 
philosophers and philosophical concepts via the auto-
matic processing of the structural features and semantic 
content of Wikipedia. By doing so, we aim at creating a 
useful and user-friendly portal for students of philosophy 
as well as the general public, thereby contributing to the 
cause of digital humanities. The project is still in its early 
stage. However, the current paper extends our previous 
work on the project (Athenikos and Lin, 2008), especial-
ly	by	presenting	new	results	and	findings.	Specifically,	
the paper illustrates extracting and visualizing the data 
concerning facts, relations, and networks involving 300 
philosophers, as extracted from Wikipedia, for seman-
tics-based search and exploration, and it presents a par-
tial comparison of the Wikipedia data against those from 
Thomson	 Reuters’	 Arts	 &	 Humanities	 Citation	 Index	
(http://thomsonreuters.com/products_services/scientific/
Arts_Humanities_Citation_Index).
Wikipedia Data Extraction
A prototype system for the project was implemented in 
Java using the Java servlet technology. First we describe 
the materials, methods, and results involving data ex-
traction.  
Materials
We only used the English version of Wikipedia. The ini-
tial results we had obtained in the project (Athenikos and 
Lin 2008) were based on the data extracted from Wiki-
pedia pages downloaded on 29 May 2008. The results 
we report in this paper are based on the Wikipedia pages 
downloaded more recently on 23 December 2008.
Methods 
We obtained a chronological list of 300 philosophers (in-
cluding	 influential	 theologians,	writers,	 scientists,	 etc.)	
from	Wikipedia’s	 “Timeline	 of	Western	 Philosophers”	
page. We extracted information on the hyperlink con-
nections and academic/biographical facts concerning the 
philosophers (as presented in infoboxes and wikitables) 
from their individual Wikipedia article pages, and stored 
the data in the form of semantic triples (Subject–Predi-
cate–Object) in a MySQL database. We retrieved the 
data needed for visualization by querying the database, 
and	 stored	 the	 results	 as	 XML	 files	 marked	 up	 with	
GraphML and TreeML. 
Results
Table 1 shows the types of information extracted. Table 
2 summarizes the basic statistics concerning the dataset.
Table 1. Types of information extracted. 
Table 2. Basic statistics on the Wikipedia dataset. 
As shown in Table 2, while there exists a high number of 
hyperlink connections among the 300 philosopher pages, 
there are a few pages that do not contain any out-links to 
the other philosopher pages and/or do not receive any in-
links. Also, only 192 philosopher pages contain infobox-
es that summarize academic/biographical facts, which is 
(at least in part) why there are some philosophers that 
are	shown	to	have	no	influenced/influenced-by	relations.	
Semantic Search Interface
We created a Web portal interface via which the user can 
issue queries on the facts, relations, and networks involv-
ing 300 philosophers and explore the results displayed 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 58
using diverse modalities of interactive information vi-
sualization as will be illustrated in the next section. Fig-
ure	1	shows	the	homepage	of	the	WikiPhiloSofia	portal	
(http://research.cis.drexel.edu:8080/sofia/WPS/).	
Figure 1. Homepage of the WikiPhiloSofia portal.
Upon entering the portal, the user will choose to focus 
on one philosopher, two philosophers, or all 300 philoso-
phers. In case a user chooses to focus on one philoso-
pher, for example, the user is directed to the menu shown 
in	Figure	2,	which	contains	three	fields	corresponding	to	
Subject, Predicate, and Object. The user can select a phi-
losopher	from	the	first	dropdown	menu,	and	then	select	
a predicate from the second dropdown menu, in order 
to retrieve relevant objects. Table 3 summarizes various 
query options and result display modalities.
Figure 2. Menu for query on one philosopher.
 
Table 3. Options for semantics-based search and 
exploration. 
Interactive Visualization 
The query results are presented via interactive visualiza-
tion, implemented by using the Prefuse information vi-
sualization toolkit (http://prefuse.org). 
Figure 3 presents a radial graph representing the facts 
about Plato, which amounts to visualizing the semantic 
network involving the philosopher. Figure 4 shows a 
fisheye	tree	representing	extended	influences	originating	
from Plato.
Figure 3. Academic/biographical facts on Plato.
Figure 4. Extended influences originating from Plato.
Figure 5 shows a radial graph representing commonali-
ties between Heidegger and Dewey.
The visualization of non-overlapping extended link/in-
fluence	relations	from/to	one	philosopher	(using	a	graph	
or	radial	graph),	and	of	strongest	link/influence	connec-
tions among 300 philosophers, is implemented by using 
a	novel	graph	simplification	method	that	we	have	devel-
oped, called the Strongest Link Paths (SLP) (Athenikos 
and	Lin,	2008),	which	substantially	simplifies	the	graph	
topology while highlighting the most dominant nodes 
and their interconnections. 
 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  59
Figure 5. Commonalities between Heidegger and Dewey.
Figure 6. Non-overlapping extended influences originating 
from Thales.
Figure	 6	 presents	 a	 radial	 graph,	 simplified	 via	 SLP,	
which	 represents	 extended	 influences	 originating	 from	
Thales. This amounts to visualizing the small-world 
network	(Milgram,	1967)	of	influence	involving	Thales.	
The	figure	shows	that	Thales,	the	first	philosopher	on	the	
chronological list of 300 philosophers, can reach Fou-
cault, the last one, within 3 degrees of separation (via 
Anaximander and Heidegger).     
The graphs that result from applying SLP to the hyper-
link/influence	 connections	 consist	 of	 distinct	 clusters	
separated from one another. Figure 7 shows a close-up of 
the largest cluster in the strongest out-link network that 
centers on Plato and Aristotle. Figure 8 shows the larg-
est	cluster	 in	the	strongest	 influenced-relation	network,	
centering on Kant.
Figure 7. Largest cluster in the strongest out-link network.
Figure 8. Largest cluster in the strongest influenced-
relation network.
Comparison with AHCI Data
In this section we discuss some of the results of compar-
ing the Wikipedia dataset against a subset of Thomson 
Reuters’	Arts	&	Humanities	Citation	Index	(AHCI)	that	
contains 1.26 million records covering the 10-year pe-
riod of 1988-1997.
Table 4 lists top 20 philosophers that receive the greatest 
number of in-links from among 300 philosophers in the 
Wikipedia dataset, those that receive in-links from the 
greatest number of philosophers in the Wikipedia data-
set, and those (among the 300 philosophers) that have 
the highest citation count in the AHCI dataset. 
Interestingly, Aristotle shows up on top for all 3 cate-
gories. While there are certain differences among the 3 
lists, the majority of the philosopher names that appear 
on the 2 lists involving the Wikipedia dataset include 
major	figures	in	the	philosophy	domain,	as	does	the	list	
obtained from the AHCI dataset. This shows that the hy-
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 60
perlink data extracted from Wikipedia, which embodies 
a huge amount of latent human annotation (Chakrabarti 
et al., 1999), provide a fairly good representation of the 
central	figures	in	philosophy.	In	order	to	prevent	a	naïve,	
simplistic,	and	literal	interpretation	of	these	findings,	it	
must be mentioned that what we argue is not that these 
philosophers	 are	 central	 figures	 because they have a 
large number of hyperlink connections in Wikipedia or 
that their relative centrality corresponds to link counts.     
Table 4. Highly in-linked vs. highly cited philosophers.
Table 5 shows a comparison of the list of philosophers 
who have bi-directional link connections with Heidegger 
in the Wikipedia dataset and the list of philosophers (con-
sidering only those that belong to the 300 philosopher 
set) that are most frequently co-cited with Heidegger 
within the AHCI dataset. As shown, 13 out of 20 most 
co-cited philosophers appear on the list of bi-linked phi-
losophers. In addition, 3 out of the remaining 7 co-cited 
philosophers (Descartes, Wittgenstein, and Augustine) 
have hyperlink connections with Heidegger in one direc-
tion. Again, we are not making a naïve argument that 
those who are bi-linked or co-cited with Heidegger are 
intellectually closer or even similar to him in the order 
of bi-link/co-citation counts. It is however interesting 
to note the overlap between the two lists. In most cases 
shown in the table it is not hard to imagine why a certain 
philosopher may be bi-linked and/or co-cited with Hei-
degger, even though the reasons vary among the cases.     
Table 5. Philosophers bi-linked vs. co-cited with 
Heidegger.
Figure 9 shows a radial graph representing 25 philoso-
phers most frequently co-cited with Heidegger and with 
Dewey, respectively. Those co-cited with Dewey include 
Heidegger. Those co-cited with both of them include 
Wittgenstein. 
Figure 9. Philosophers most often co-cited with Heidegger 
and Dewey.  
Related Work and Discussion
Wikipedia has recently become a topic of intense interest 
among researchers who recognize its utility as a source 
of a vast amount of knowledge that can be exploited for 
various applications. What renders Wikipedia a particu-
larly valuable resource is the fact that it can be mined for 
knowledge based on its structural features as well as its 
textual content (Zesch et al., 2007). As such, some Se-
mantic Web (Berners-Lee et al., 2001) researchers have 
turned to Wikipedia for clues to mitigating the knowl-
edge acquisition bottleneck (Krötzsch et al., 2005). In 
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  61
this paper we have demonstrated extracting/visualizing 
structured data available in Wikipedia by exploiting its 
hyperlinks (cf. Bellomi and Bonato, 2005), category 
links (cf. Chernov et al., 2006), and templates (i.e., in-
foboxes and wikitables) (cf. Auer and Lehmann, 2007). 
The logical extension of the current approach would 
be to extend the methodology to derive more extensive 
and implicit relations and connections, by exploiting the 
textual content of Wikipedia articles and by employing 
inference.     
Social network analysis (SNA) has been used for some 
time in diverse disciplines besides sociology. With the 
advent	 of	Web	 2.0	 (O’Reilly,	 2005),	 characterized	 by	
the emergence of various collaborative authoring, blog-
ging, bookmarking, tagging, networking, etc. sites that 
utilize combined social capital, SNA has become a key 
technique for capturing and exploiting data on social 
connections and interactions for various applications. 
Even though we have not attempted (and do not intend) 
to compute various centrality measures used in SNA 
(Wasserman and Faust, 1994), we have shown that the 
lists of highly-connected philosophers obtained by us-
ing even the simple hyperlink data in general provide a 
good	representation	of	the	central	figures	in	the	philoso-
phy domain (not in the naïve sense that rankings purely 
based on hyperlink statistics correspond to the relative 
importance of each philosopher one-to-one). We have 
also shown that the networks of philosophers emerging 
from the hyperlink and semantic data extracted from 
Wikipedia exhibit the characteristic of the small world 
(Milgram, 1967) or the six degrees of separation phe-
nomenon. 
Insofar as the networks that we consider in this project 
are concerned with the connections among philosophers 
(and philosophical concepts), indirectly derived from 
Wikipedia, and not with the direct connections and in-
teractions among the editors of the corresponding Wiki-
pedia articles, the project is related to citation analysis, 
in particular, author co-citation analysis (ACA) (White, 
2003). In this regard, we have presented a partial com-
parison of the results based on the Wikipedia data against 
those	obtained	by	applying	ACA	 to	Thomson	Reuters’	
AHCI	data,	 using	 specific	 examples.	While	 the	 results	
have shown an overall correspondence between the two 
datasets, it must be pointed out that the comparison was 
limited to 300 philosophers considered. It must again be 
emphasized that we do not equate link count or co-cita-
tion count with intellectual closeness or similarity.    
Lastly,	the	WikiPhiloSofia	project	is	prominently	a	proj-
ect about visualization as an effective mode of data/
information/knowledge representation. Information vi-
sualization, via the use of interactive, visual representa-
tions of abstract data, serves to amplify human cogni-
tion, making it possible or easier to recognize the hidden 
patterns and structures that might not otherwise be quite 
apparent or comprehensible (Card et al., 1997; Tufte, 
1990),	while	enhancing	the	user’s	information	search	ex-
perience at the aesthetic level as well. We have illustrated 
how the results of various user queries can be presented 
using diverse modalities of visualization, by effectively 
visualizing the facts, relations, and networks that pertain 
to the 300 philosophers in the Wikipedia dataset. In par-
ticular, we have applied the Strongest Link Paths (SLP) 
method (Athenikos and Lin, 2008), which selects only 
the strongest link connections (measured in terms of hy-
perlink count or other connection strength measure) in 
order	to	highlight	the	most	significant	nodes	and	links.	
Even though SLP is rather simpler than other graph scal-
ing	methods	such	as	pathfinder	network	(Schvaneveldt,	
Durso, and Dearholt, 1989) or main path analysis (Hum-
mon and Doreian, 1989), we have found that it allows 
us to achieve substantial data reduction and to obtain a 
meaningful	 representation	 of	 the	 dominant	figures	 and	
their connections within the network of philosophers 
even from the simple hyperlink data.
Conclusion
The	WikiPhiloSofia	project	aims	at	creating	a	knowledge	
portal based on the data extracted from Wikipedia. In 
this paper we have illustrated extracting and visualizing 
the facts, relations, and networks involving 300 major 
philosophers in order to enable semantics-based search 
and exploration. The future work will include extend-
ing the approach to include more philosophers, extract-
ing and visualizing the connections among philosophical 
concepts, deriving more extensive and implicit relations 
and connections, as well as applying the methodology 
to domains other than philosophy for comparison and 
evaluation purposes.
References
Athenikos, S.J. and Lin, X. (2008). The WikiPhil Por-
tal: Visualizing Meaningful Philosophical Connections, 
Presented at 2008 Chicago Colloquium on Digital Hu-
manities and Computer Science (DHCS 2008), Chicago, 
IL, November 2008. Forthcoming in Proceedings of the 
Chicago Colloquia on Digital Humanities and Comput-
er Science. 
Auer, S. and Lehmann, J. (2007). What Have Innsbruck 
and Leipzig in Common? Extracting Semantics from 
Wiki Content, Proceedings of 4th European Semantic 
Web Conference (ESWC 2007), Innsbruck, Austria, June 
2007.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page 62
Bellomi, F. and Bonato, R. (2005). Network Analysis 
for Wikipedia, Proceedings of the First International 
Wikimedia Conference (Wikimania 2005), Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany, August 2005.
Berners-Lee, T., Handler, J., and Ossila, O. (2001). The 
Semantic Web, Scientific American, 284: 34-43.
Card, S. K., Mackinlay, J. D., and Shneiderman, B. 
(eds.). (1997). Readings in Information Visualization: 
Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufman Publishers, San 
Francisco, CA.
Chakrabarti, S., Dom, B. E., Kumar, S. R., Raghavan, P., 
Rajagopalan, S., Tomkins, A. D., Gibson, D., and Klein-
berg,	J.	(1999).	Mining	the	Web’s	Link	Structure,	Com-
puter, 32(8): 60-67.
Chernov, S., Iofciu, T., Nejdl, W., and Zhou, X. (2006). 
Extracting Semantic Relationships between Wikipedia 
Categories, Proceedings of the First Workshop on Se-
mantics Wikis (SemWiki 2006) at the Third European 
Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2006), Budva, Mon-
tenegro, June 2006.
Hummon, N. P. and Doreian, P. (1989). Connectivity in 
a Citation Network: The Development of DNA Theory, 
Social Networks, 11: 39-63.
Krötzsch,	 M.,	 Vrandečić,	 D.,	 and	 Völkel,	 M.	 (2005).	
Wikipedia and the Semantic Web – the Missing Links, 
Proceedings of the First Wikimedia Conference (Wiki-
mania 2005), Frankfurt am Main, Germany, August 
2005.
Milgram, S. (1967). The Small World Problem, Psychol-
ogy Today, 1(1): 60–67.
O’Reilly,	T.	 (2005).	What	 Is	Web	2.0:	Design	Patterns	
and Business Models for the Next Generation of Soft-
ware. http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/
news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html (Last accessed 
12 November 2008).
Schvaneveldt, R.W., Durso, F.T., and Dearholt, D.W. 
(1989). Network Structures in Proximity Data, The Psy-
chology of Learning and Motivation: Advances in Re-
search and Theory, vol. 24, G. Bower (ed.), 249-284. 
Academic Press, New York.
Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning Information. Graphics 
Press, Cheshire, CT.
Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994). Social Network 
Analysis. Methods and Applications. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, UK.
White,	 H.	 D.	 (2003).	 Pathfinder	 Networks	 and	 author	
Cocitation Analysis: A Remapping of Paradigmatic In-
formation Scientists, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, 54(5): 423-434.
Zesch, T., Gurevych, I., and Mühlhäuser, M. (2007). An-
alyzing and Accessing Wikipedia as a Lexical Semantic 
Resource, Proceedings of the Biannual Conference of 
the Society for Computational Linguistics and Language 
Technology, Tübingen, Germany, April 2007.
DIGITAL HUMANITIES 2009
Page  63
