Present, not voting: Digital
Humanities in the Panopticon:
closing plenary speech,
Digital Humanities 2010
............................................................................................................................................................
Melissa Terras
Reader in Electronic Communication, Department of Information
Studies, University College London, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Digital Humanities faces many issues in the current financial and educational
climate. In this closing plenary from the Digital Humanities conference 2010 at
King’s College London, major concerns about the current role and function of
Digital Humanities are raised, demonstrating the practical and theoretical aspects
of Digital Humanities research in regard to an individual project at University
College London: Transcribe Bentham. It is suggested that those in the Digital
Humanities have to be more aware of our history, impact, and identity, if the
discipline is to continue to flourish in tighter economic climes, and that unless we
maintain and establish a more professional attitude towards our scholarly out-
puts, we will remain ‘present, not voting’ within the academy. The plenary ends
with suggestions as to how the individual, institution, and funding body can
foster and aid the Digital Humanities, ensuring the field’s relevance and
impact in today’s academic culture. This article is a transcript of what was
planned to be said at DH2010, although the spoken plenary digresses from the
following in places. The video of the speech can be viewed at http://www.arts-
humanities.net/video/dh2010_keynote_melissa_terras_present_not_voting_digital_
humanities_panopticon.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
1.1 Preamble, the first
First, let me say how honoured I am to have
been asked to be the plenary speaker at Digital
Humanities conference 2010 (DH2010). I
understand that this is a deviation from previous
conferences—for the first time, instead of getting
someone external to the community to talk about
semi-related research areas, they have asked some-
one from well within the discipline to present. I am
aware that, in a room that holds 250 people, there
are 249 people other than myself who are more than
qualified to stand up for an hour and say what they
currently think of the Digital Humanities (not to
mention the other 200 folks registered for the con-
ference who may be watching from the streaming
lecture theatre).
It is also worth saying that I am incredibly
nervous. Many of those in the audience are close
colleagues, many are good friends. This is not a
conference I can walk away from and forget a dis-
astrous presentation. I am very aware that the rules
of giving plenary speeches have changed as rapidly
Correspondence:
Melissa Terras,
Reader in Electronic
Communication,
Department of Information
Studies, University College
London, London, UK
E-mail: m.terras@ucl.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
257
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr016 Advance Access published on 6 May 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
as the information environment over the past few
years. I remember a plenary at Association for
Literary and Linguistic Computing/Association for
Computers and the Humanities (ALLC/ACH, as the
conference was then known) 10 or so years ago
where the speaker read out a chapter of their
book, never looking up at the audience once,
and with no concession given for the change of pres-
entational mode: ‘As I said on page 39. As I will
discuss in chapter five . . .’ Nowadays, given that I
am being recorded and simultaneously broad-
cast online, that just will not cut it. You expect
more.
As well as being <nervous>, I am aware that I am
being #nervous. Many of you will already have
tweeted comments about what I have said online,
even though I have not really begun yet. That is fine,
and I am not looking for any special treatment. I
just want you to be aware that I am aware that these
are changed days. I do not know how I am being
watched and perceived, as much as you do not
know what I am going to say next. In fact, surveil-
lance is just one of the things I want to talk to you
about today.
1.2 Preamble the second
For those of you who do not know me, I am from
University College London (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/),
just a mile north from King’s. UCL and King’s were
both founder members of the University of London
in 1836 (Harte, 1986; University of London, 2010),
and the two Universities have an interesting, com-
petitive history. UCL was set up as a secular educa-
tional establishment, letting in anyone who could
pay the fees [such as Gandhi and Women (Harte,
1979; Harte and North, 1991)] whereas King’s was
set up as an Anglican church-based institution, in
reaction to the ‘Great Godless of Gower Street’
threatening to allow education to all just up the
road. The two institutions have remained locked
in friendly—but sometimes fierce—competitive
mode, ever since. A recent Provost’s newsletter
from UCL ran with a headline that UCL had
beaten King’s in the women’s rugby varsity match
22–0 (Grant, 2010). On the academic front, we are
often competing for the same staff, students, grants,
and even facilities. UCL has recently established its
Centre for Digital Humanities (http://www.ucl.ac.
uk/dh/), which forms a competitive alternative to
the teaching and research that has been established
at King’s Centre for Computing in the Humanities
(now the Department of Digital Humanities, http://
www.kcl.ac.uk/ddh/). And so it goes on.
We are proud at UCL of the different nature of
our university. As opposed to King’s, we never will
have a theology department, and do not provide a
place of worship on campus. Much of the founding
principles of UCL were influenced by the Jurist,
Philosopher, and legal and social reformer, Jeremy
Bentham who believed in equality, animal rights,
utilitarianism, and welfarism (http://www.ucl.ac
.uk/Bentham-Project/). UCL special collections
host 60,000 folios of Bentham’s letters and manu-
scripts, many of which have not been transcribed.
Upon his death, Bentham’s skeleton was preserved
as an ‘Auto-icon’ (a two fingers up to those who
believed in religion and the need for a Christian
funeral), which now sits, dressed in his favourite
outfit, in the cloisters at UCL. There is an oft re-
peated story that Bentham’s body is wheeled into
Senate meetings, although he is noted in the mi-
nutes as ‘Present, not Voting’ (Bentham Project,
2009).
You will notice that in early colour photos,
you can still see Bentham’s real preserved head at
the base of the Auto-Icon. This has been stored in
Special Collections ever since 1975, when (the story
goes) students from King’s stole it, merrily kicked it
around the quad, and then held it to ransom.
Friendly competition, indeed.
1.3 Introduction proper
Time to draw this properly back to Digital
Humanities (DH) and the plenary in question.
One of Bentham’s main interests was penal
reform, and he is perhaps most famous for his
design of the Panopticon, a prison which allowed
jailors to observe (-opticon) all (pan-) prisoners
without the incarcerated being able to tell whether
they are being watched. This psychologically, and
physically, brutal prison was never built, but the
concept has lived on as metaphor, influencing a
wide range of artists, writers, and theorists, includ-
ing George Orwell (who worked in room 101 of
M. Terras
258 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Senate House, in-between UCL and King’s,
and would have been well aware of Jeremy
Bentham’s work) and Foucault (1975). Indeed,
the Panopticon can be taken as a metaphor for
western society, and increasingly, online communi-
cation, particularly social media. Every time you
tweet, do you know who is paying attention?
What audience are we performing for, and can
you be sure you are in control of how our actions
are viewed and used?
Now, I cannot pretend to be an omnipresence
that has been watching all that has been happening
in the DH over the past few months. But when you
are asked to do a plenary speech such as this, believe
me, you start to pay attention to things. You do
your homework. I have been peering into the twit-
tersphere panopticon and wondering what to say.
Which will be the following.
I am going to talk briefly about the Transcribe
Bentham project, as a type of DH project that can
objectively demonstrate the changes that are occur-
ring in our field at the moment.
I am going to use this project as a window to peer
at current issues in DH—or at least things that I
have learnt from the project—and the wider com-
munity—over the past few months.
And finally, I am going to set you all homework
based on the key things that are emerging in our
field. Friendly competition is not so friendly just
now. There are tough times ahead for academia,
given the current financial crisis and promised cut-
backs. What can we learn from the areas highlighted
by this discussion, and what can we do better as a
field, so those who are looking at us (and believe
me, managers and administrators and financial
experts are looking at us) can visibly see what we
are up to?
2 Transcribe Bentham
Transcribe Bentham is a one-year, Arts and
Humanities Research Council funded project,
housed under the auspices of the Bentham Project
at UCL (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/).
The Bentham Project aims to produce new editions
of the scholarship of Jeremy Bentham, and so far
twelve volumes of Bentham’s correspondence have
been published by the Bentham Project, plus various
collections of his work on jurisprudence and legal
matters (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/
publications). However, there is much more work
to be done to make his writings more accessible,
and to provide transcripts of the materials therein.
Although a previous grant from the AHRC in
2003–6 has allowed for the completion of a cata-
logue of the manuscripts held within UCL (http://
www.benthampapers.ucl.ac.uk/), and transcriptions
have been completed of some 10,000 folios (cur-
rently stored in MS Word, etc.), there are many
hours of work that need to be invested in reading,
transcribing, labelling, and making accessible the
works of this interdisciplinary historical figure if
they are to be analysed, consulted, and utilized by
scholars across the various disciplines interested in
Bentham’s writings.
Crowdsourcing—the harnessing of online activ-
ity to aid in large-scale projects that require human
cognition—is becoming of interest to those in the
library, museum, and cultural heritage industry, as
institutions seek ways to publically engage their
online communities, as well as aid in creating
useful and usable digital resources (Holley, 2010).
As one of the first cultural and heritage projects
to apply crowdsourcing to a non-trivial task,
UCL’s Bentham Project has recently set up the
‘Transcribe Bentham’ initiative; an ambitious,
open source, participatory online environment
which is being developed to aid in transcribing
10,000 folios of Bentham’s handwritten documents
(http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham/). To be
formally launched in September 2010, this experi-
mental initiative will aim to engage with individuals
such as school children, amateur historians, and
other interested parties, who can provide time to
help us read Bentham’s manuscripts. The integra-
tion of user communities will be a key to the success
of the project, and an additional project remit is to
monitor the success of trying to engage the wider
community with such documentary material. Will
we get high quality, trustworthy transcriptions as
a result of this work? Will people be interested in
volunteering their time and effort to read the (poor)
handwriting of a great philosopher? What technical
Digital Humanities in the Panopticon
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 259
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
and pragmatic difficulties will we run into?
How can we monitor success in a crowdsourced
environment?
One of the other things that is interesting about
the Bentham Project, and the Transcribe Bentham
initiative, is that it demonstrates neatly the progres-
sion of DH in historical manuscript-based projects.
The Bentham Project has been primarily occupied
with print output, gaining a web presence in the
mid-1990s, then an online database of the
Bentham archive in the early twentieth century,
and is now carrying out a moderately large-scale
digitization project to scan in Bentham’s writings
for Transcribe Bentham. In addition, the Bentham
Project has gone from a simple web page, to an
interactive Web 2.0 environment, from MS Word
to TEI-encoded XML texts, and from relatively
inward looking academic project to an outward
facing, community-building exercise. We can peer
at DH through this one project, and see the trans-
formative aspects that technologies have had on our
working practices, and the practices of those work-
ing in the historical domain.
3 Transcribe Bentham, and
emerging issues in DH
I could talk about crowdsourcing for an entire hour,
but I thought it would be more useful to point out
to those involved in the DH community some of the
emergent issues that I have found myself tackling
while engaging in the Transcribe Bentham project.
It is certainly true that for every project that you
work on you learn new things about the field, and
over the past year various aspects of DH research
and issues that concern the DH community have
raised their head.
I am going now to talk about some of these
issues, backing up what I say with some observa-
tions of what has been happening in the DH com-
munity, through conversations that others have
been having on Twitter. Forgive me if you just
think I am a stalker. A lot of these issues are becom-
ing more visible in the DH community, so I am
going to quote you on those.
3.1 Our dependence on primary
sources, our dependence on modern
technology
I have never felt more of a Jack of all trades, master
of none working on Transcribe Bentham. And it is
great. Let us be clear—the Bentham Project belongs
to Professor Philip Schofield, who has been working
on it for over 25 years (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/laws/
academics/profiles/index.shtml?schofield). I have
just been drafted in to help bridge the gap be-
tween primary sources, dedicated scholars, and
new technology. On the one hand, I am utterly
dependent on scholars who know less than me
about IT, and more than me about their sub-
ject domain, to make an academic contribution.
On the other, I am utterly dependent on some
programmers who have the time to work up the
ideas we have for Transcribe Bentham into a com-
plex (but seemingly simple!) working environment
for transcribing documents, in just a few months.
I would be lost without access to historical know-
ledge and source material, and I would be lost
without access to new, online cutting edge,
technologies.
This is something I see repeated across our dis-
cipline. When Ray Siemens tweets ‘Among many
highlights of an excellent week, holding a well-read
copy of Thynne’s 1532 Chaucer, as well as an
iPad . . .’ we get the joy (Siemens, 2010). When
Brian Croxall tweets ‘Gah, can’t get online at this
hotel’ (Croxall, 2010), we feel his frustration at
being cut-off from a service and an environment
which is becoming as essential to us as running
water or oxygen. When Bethany Nowviskie tweets
‘Dreamed last night that my #DH2010 poster was a
set of flexible, give away, interactive touchscreens.
Maybe not too far in the future’ (Nowviskie, 2010),
we nod in recognition, and go, yeah . . . that would
be cool . . . let me Google that and see if they
exist . . . We exist in this parallel state where we are
looking towards humanities research, and com-
putational technology, and it can be immensely
rewarding, and great fun. I am really enjoying
working on Transcribe Bentham. I really enjoy the
duality of DH research (as long as I can get online
when I want).
M. Terras
260 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3.2 Legacy data
But as well as working with historical documents
(or artefacts, or whatever), it is becoming increas-
ingly common with the DH that we have to work
with historical digital documents—or legacy data,
left over from the not-so-distant past, in different
formats and structures that need bringing into cur-
rent thinking on best practice with digital data. This
can take immense amounts of work. Converting
10,000 transcribed Bentham documents from MS
Word to TEI-compliant XML, with any granularity
of markup, is not a trivial task. Linking these tran-
scripts with the records currently held in the online
database, and then UCL’s library record system (to
deal with usability and sustainability issues) is not a
trivial task. Linking existing transcriptions with any
digitized images of the writings which exist is not a
trivial task. Transcribe Bentham, then, is dealing
with sorting its own ducks into a row, as well as
undertaking new and novel research.
Most of us understand this, and we understand
just how much work (and cost) is involved in con-
tinually ensuring we are maintaining and updating
our work and our records to make sure that our
digital resources can continue to be used. So we
understand that a seemingly simple tweet by Tom
Elliott saying ‘more BAtlas legacy data added to
Pleiades today, courtesy of @sgillies http://bit.ly/
dBuYFg’ (Elliott, 2010) belies an incredible
amount of work to convert and maintain an existing
resource. As well as looking forward to the future,
and embracing new technologies, we must be our
own archivists.
3.3 Sustainability
Which brings me to the thorny issue of sustainabil-
ity. We hope with Transcribe Bentham that the pro-
ject will continue far beyond its one-year remit, but
there are some decisions to make in that regard.
Will the user forums, and user contributions, con-
tinue to be monitored and moderated if we cannot
afford a staff member to do so? Will the wiki get
locked down at the close of funding or will we leave
it to its own devices, to become an online-free-for
all? We are at the stage, in a one-year project, where
we already need to be applying for future funding,
before we have even got anything to demonstrate
that it is worth continuing our funding (and there
is no guarantee in the current climate that any fund-
ing will be forthcoming, see below). But we are
lucky in Transcribe Bentham—its father project,
the Bentham Project, will continue whatever hap-
pens, under the watchful auspices of Philip
Schofield. So when Dan Cohen is quoted, by
Shane Landrum, in a tweet that reminds us ‘Being
a labour of love is often the best sustainability
model’ (Landrum, 2010), we understand what that
means. Sustainability is an area of huge concern for
the DH community, and is going to become more
so as financial issues get more complex.
3.4 Digital identity
Transcribe Bentham is going to live or die by its
digital identity and digital presence. It does not
have any equivalent in the offline world. It is what
it is: an online place to hang out and help Transcribe
some documents, should that take your fancy. To be
a success, then, our functionality, digital presence,
and digital identity need to be absolutely spot on.
Ironically, I have never worked on a DH project
before where the digital presence mattered so
much, and I have come to realize that we all
should be taking our digital identity and digital
presence a lot more seriously. It is not enough just
to whack up a web site and say ‘that’ll do, now back
to writing books’. If we are going to be in the busi-
ness of producing digital resources, we have to be
able to excel at producing digital resources, and be
conscious of our digital identity and digital
presence.
We are lucky at Transcribe Bentham to have
gained the input of one of my PhD students,
Rudolf Ammann (@rkammann) who is also a
gifted graphic designer. He has taken it upon
himself to whip both UCL Centre for DH, and
Transcribe Bentham, into online shape, while de-
signing logos for us which are fitting, useful, and
memorable. We are being careful with Transcribe
Bentham to roll our presence out over twitter and
Facebook to try and encourage interaction. We hope
that someone will be watching.
Suddenly, it matters in a way that did not matter
before, if people are looking at our web site and our
resource. I believe that digital presence and digital
Digital Humanities in the Panopticon
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 261
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
identity is becoming more important to DH as a
discipline. So when Amanda French jokily tweets
‘I feel like a got a rejection letter yesterday from
@DHNow when too few RTed my ‘‘binary hero’’
post http://bit.ly/aKpBiX’ (French, 2010), we under-
stand the complexity of interacting in the new digit-
al environment: we want the discourse, and want
the attention (and if you do not know what
DHNow is, you should be reading it every day:
http://digitalhumanitiesnow.org/). Likewise, when
Matt Kirschenbaum tweets ‘Has Twitter done
more as DH infrastructure than any dedicated
effort to date?’ and this is immediately retweeted
by Tim Sherratt with an addendum ‘[For me it
has!]’ (Sherratt, 2010), we understand the possibili-
ties that are afforded with new modes of online
communication. How we can harness this properly
for Transcribe Bentham remains to be seen—but we
are at least aware we need to make the effort.
3.5 Embracing the random, embracing
the open
There are large differences between producing a per-
fect (or as near perfect as can be) print edition of
Bentham’s letters, and learning to deal with the vari-
ous levels of quality of input we will be getting with
Transcribe Bentham. There are large differences be-
tween working in a close knit group of scholars, to
working with the general public. There are also dif-
ferences in producing online editions and sources
which you are willing to open up to other uses—
and one of the things we want to do with Transcribe
Bentham is to provide access to the resulting XML
files so that others can reuse the information (via
web services, etc.). The hosting and transcription
environment we are developing will be open
source, so that others can use it. And this sea
change, from working in small groups, to really
reaching out to users is something we have to em-
brace, and learn to work with. We also have to give
up on ideas of absolute perfection, and go for
broader projects, embracing input from a wider
audience, and the chaos that ensues. So we under-
stand when Dan Cohen tweets ‘Another leitmotif
I’m sensing: as academics, we need to get over our
obsession w/ perfect, singular, finished, editorial
vols’ (Cohen, 2010). Bring it. Let us see what
happens . . .
3.6 Impact
I only realized recently that my automatic reaction
to getting involved with the Transcribe Bentham
project was ‘how can I get from this some output
that counts for me’. We wrote into the grant bid a
period of user testing and feedback, and one of the
reasons is to get a few pretty much guaranteed pub-
lications out of the project, looking at the success—
or not!—of crowdsourcing in cultural heritage pro-
jects. Get few academic outputs in there, then we
can go and play online, and not have to worry too
much about how creating an open source tool, or
reaching out to a potential audience of thousands,
will ‘count’ in the academic world. Because no
matter how successful Transcribe Bentham, the
‘impact’ will be felt in the same usual way—through
publications. This is nonsense, but it is part of the
academic game, and is becoming of increasing frus-
tration to those working in the DH. It is not enough
to make something that is successful and interesting
and well used: you have to write a paper about it
that gets published in the Journal of Successful
Academic Stuff to make that line on your CV
count, and to justify your time spent on the project.
So we understand the frustration felt by Stephen
Ramsay when he puts a mini-documentary online
which goes as viral as things really get in the DH,
viewed by thousands of people, but which will have
no real impact on his career: ‘I’ve published some
print articles. Funny thing though: None of them
were read by 2000 people in the space of 2 week-
s . . . had their titles printed on t-shirts, or resulted in
dozens of emails from adoring fans. So why am I
writing journal articles again? . . . .Oh wait, never-
mind, my department doesn’t count movies.’
(Ramsay, 2010a,b,c).
3.7 Routes to jobs
This is a tricky one. Should those hired in Digital
Humanities projects to do technical work have a
PhD in DH—even if the tasks in the role are service
level (such as marking up TEI) and do not require
that academic training? I am willing to admit that
Transcribe Bentham walked right into the storm
M. Terras
262 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
with this one when our job adverts for our two RAs
went up. We advertised for two postdocs: one with a
historical background that had experience working
in the Bentham studies area, one with TEI chops to
help us with the back end of the system. We speci-
fied that we wanted PhDs because of the changed
rules in employment at Universities in the UK (well,
at least those involved in the common pay frame-
work): if we had advertised for posts at non-PhD
level, we would not have been able to employ some-
one with a PhD, even if they wanted to work for less
money, because of the spine point system. So, we
advertise for two postdocs, and if someone good
comes through without a PhD, we can employ
them on a lower rate. But we forgot to mention
that applications from those without a PhD may
also be considered. Cue much online discussion in
various forums.
We get this frustration. Dot Porter said, on
Facebook rather than Twitter, ‘I get annoyed when
I read job postings for positions that require a PhD,
and then read the job description and can’t figure
out why. Maybe I’m sensitive, not having a PhD? Is
a PhD really required for one to take part in the
digital humanities these days, even in supporting
(non-research) roles?’ (Porter, 2010).
This is becoming a real issue in DH. There is no
clear route to an academic job, and no clear route to
PhD, and there are a lot of people at a high level in
the field who do not have PhDs. Yet increasingly, we
expect the younger intake to have gone down that
route, and then to work in service level roles (partly
because there are few academic jobs). It remains to
be seen how we can address this. In Transcribe
Bentham, we changed the advert to make it clear
we accepted applications from non-PhDs. In the
end, we did appoint two postdocs, but at least we
made it clear that people had the option to apply for
a job where, ostensibly, you did not need a PhD, just
the skill set, to undertake the task properly.
3.8 Young scholars
This problem of employment and career and pro-
gression taps into a general frustration for
young scholars in our field. It can be hard to get a
foothold, and hard to get a job (not just in DH–in
the UK over 15% of graduates under the age of 25
years are currently unemployed. It is a tough time to
be coming out of university, PhD or no PhD).
Perhaps it was always difficult to make the transition
from academic student to academic Academic, but
twitter amplifies the issues that are facing young
scholars trying to make headway in the field. I was
very aware when hiring for Transcribe Bentham that
there were some very good candidates out there who
just were not getting a break (the person who came
second in the interview, and who we would have
employed instantly had we had two historical post-
doc positions, later told me that he had had over 20
interviews, but we were the first people to give him
any feedback). We should not forget the pressure
young scholars are under (at a time when we are
complaining of the financial pressures that us paid
academics are under) and how difficult it can be for
them on both a professional and personal level. It
makes me sad to hear tweets like the one from Ryan
Cordell saying ‘Just wrote a tough email withdraw-
ing from #DH2010. Even if I got a bursary, I just
couldn’t swing it in the same summer as our move
#sigh.’ (Cordell, 2010). (However, it is worth noting
that the DH conference currently offers four differ-
ent types of bursary to young scholars, as well as
mentoring schemes such as those provided by
ACH.)
3.9 Economic downturn
Which brings me to the next doom and gloom
point. When Brett Bobley tweets ‘Two weeks ago,
no one in my kid’s school had Silly Bandz; now they
all wear them. How come higher ed never moves
that fast?’ (Bobley, 2010), we all chuckle at the
thought of the academy as being a reactive, imme-
diate place to be. It takes a few years for the impact
of outside events to trickle down. Its only now that
the economic downturn is starting to hit Higher
Education. In the UK, cuts over the next few
years are predicted to be anything between 25
and 40%, depending on what leak or rumour or
Governmental minister you believe. These are un-
certain times for research, and for institutions, and
for individuals, and for projects. We do not know if
there will be money to even apply for to continue
the research and application in the Transcribe
Bentham project. We do not know, even if we
Digital Humanities in the Panopticon
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 263
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
submit an application, that the funding council will
not suddenly reject all applications due to their
funding cuts. We do not know how to make an
economic case for projects in the Arts,
Humanities, Heritage, and Culture, so that when
panjandrums and apparatchiks are deciding which
swinging cut to make next, we can display our rele-
vance, our impact, the point of our existence, and
why people should keep writing the cheques. These
are uncertain times. How this is affecting DH is
slowly beginning to be played out.
3.10 Money, the humanities, and
job security
I feel that it would be morally wrong of me to come
to a conference at King’s that has the word
Humanities in the title and not broach the subject
of what had happened over the past year to the
Humanities at King’s (Morgan, 2010a,b, Tickle
and Bowcott, 2010). Palaeography is a subject
close to my heart, and as @DrGnosis tweeted
during the opening speech of #DH2010, ‘I weep
for Palaeography’ (@DrGnosis, 2010). I also like to
think that had any one of the 420 other registered
conference attendees from the DH community been
asked to give this plenary that they would have the
guts to raise this issue. But I am guest here and do
not want to be rude or impolite. So I will repeat
what was tweeted by John Theibault: ‘There’s going
to be a bit of a pall over dh2010 because of all that’s
gone on with KCL’ (Theibault, 2010). And I recom-
mend if you do not understand what I am talking
about, then you read about it, and understand how
little respect was given to Humanities academics at
Kings over the past year from their management
(Pears, 2010). And I suggest you hope that your
own management have not been taking notes, and
do not proceed in a similar fashion, for what hope is
there then for the Humanities?
It is very difficult for those in the Humanities to
make the economic case for their existence, and that
is what we are being expected to do in the current
climate. We need to be able to explain why projects
like Transcribe Bentham are relevant, and important
and useful. Those in the humanities are historically
bad at doing this, and those in DH are no different.
But DH is different from traditional humanities
research: on the plus side, we should be able to ar-
ticulate the transferable skill set that comes with DH
research, that can educate and influence a wide
range of culture, heritage, creative, and even
business processes. On the downside, projects
like Transcribe Bentham are more expensive
than paying one individual scholar for a year to
write their scholarly tome on, say, Byzantine
Sigillography—the digital equivalent will require re-
searchers, computer programmers, computer kit,
digitization costs, etc. To ensure that the Digital
Humanities are funded at the time when funding
is being withdrawn from the Humanities, we need
to be prepared, and to articulate and explain why
what we do is important, and relevant.
3.11 Fears for the future
Of course, it is not just the Humanities that are in a
perilous financial state: in the UK, it is the whole of
the sector. At King’s, it is not just Humanities that
have taken the hit, but also the Engineering Faculty
(Hurst, 2010). Profitable groups from disciplines
such as Computer Science have been poached
wholesale by other Universities (not so friendly
competition now, is it?). And this is a pattern we
are seeing across the Universities in the UK. We are
all scared; for the continuation of our projects (such
as Transcribe Bentham), for our students, for our
young scholars on temporary contracts, for our ‘re-
search profile’ (whatever that may mean) and for
our own jobs. We understand the implicit horror
in a tweet such as that from Simon Tanner saying
‘England next? Plan to close smaller #Welsh
#Universities broadly welcomed by #education
professionals. http://bit.ly/dxWBsj #HE #wales.’
(Tanner, 2010).
If we think that no-one is watching us and
making value judgements about our community,
our research, our relevance, and our output, then
we are misguided. It is not just other scholars who
are paying attention, but those who hold the purse
strings—who often have no choice but to make
brutal cuts. The Humanities are one of the easiest
targets, given scholars’ reluctance or inability to
make the case for themselves. I am reminded of a
phrase from Orwell’s 1984, and what happened to
society when under the horrific pressure and
M. Terras
264 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
surveillance within. Allow me to paraphrase: if we
are not prepared, and if we are not careful, these
cuts will be ‘a boot stamping on the face of the
humanities, forever’. I remember very strongly
that at the end of an upbeat DH2009 Neil Fraistat
stood up and said ‘The Digital Humanities have
arrived!’. But in 2010, the place we have arrived to
is a changed landscape, and not nearly as optimistic.
We are not in Kansas now, Toto.
4 Digital humanities in the
panopticon
So let us pretend that we are someone from outside
our community, watching the goings on in aca-
demia and making value judgements, and financial
judgements, about our discipline and field. How
does DH itself hold up when under scrutiny? How
do we fair with the crucial aspects of Digital
Identity, Impact, and Sustainability?
The answer is—not very well. From the outside
looking in, we look amateur. We should know and
understand best, among many academic fields, how
important it is to maintain and sustain our digital
presence and our community. But our web pres-
ence, across the associations, sucks. The ACH web
site says it was last updated in 2003 (http://www
.ach.org/). The ALLC web site is a paean to unneces-
sary white space (http://www.allc.org/). SDH/SEMI
is not so bad, but has its own problems with navi-
gation and presentation (I am including it here so as
not to leave out a whole association, http://www
.sdh-semi.org/)—but the ADHO web site is a
prime example of what happens when Wikis are
not wiki-ed (http://digitalhumanities.org/). These
are our outward faces. These are our representa-
tions of the field. We have been slow to em-
brace other social media and new technologies
when we are the field that is supposed to show
how it is done.
But what you may not know is that the associ-
ations have recently taken this on board. There is a
lot of hard work going on behind the scenes on all
accounts, so I do not want to lay into folks too badly
on this. A wireframe of the new ADHO site, which
should be up and running shortly, demonstrates
that we are moving into the twenty-first century,
finally. What is interesting is the big space for a
mission statement, and a definition of the field
(which we at DH do not have, yet!). We need to
take our digital presence more seriously, and to em-
brace the potentials that we all know about, but
have not pitched in to help represent for the
discipline.
What about impact? We have been historically
bad at articulating our relevance and our successes
and our impact beyond our immediate community
(and sometimes within our immediate commu-
nity—it surprised me recently when a leading scho-
lar in the field was told, via twitter, of the role the
DH community had in the formulation of XML).
We are bad at knowing our own history, as a dis-
cipline, and having examples listed off the top of our
heads of why our research community is required in
today’s academe.
As for sustainability, DH scholars should know
how important it is to preserve our discipline’s heri-
tage, and should lead the way in demonstrating this
to other fields. Yet it is only been recently that scho-
lars in the field have started to note the disappear-
ance of abstracts from previous conferences, web
sites which have disappeared overnight, the fact
we do not have, and cannot locate, a complete
back run of the journals printed by the associations.
For example, we do not have any of the image files
included in the ALLC/ACH 2000 abstract book. We
need to look after our heritage: no-one else will.
What you may not know, again, is that a few
people are working behind the scenes to try and
build up digital copies of our discipline’s history,
and hopefully over the next year or so we will see
this available online. We need to be leading the way
in the humanities for publishing and maintaining
and sustaining our discipline, to demonstrate that,
yes, we really do know what we are talking about. At
the moment, it looks like we do not.
Why does all this matter? I bring you back to the
title of my talk: ‘Present, not Voting: Digital
Humanities in the Panopticon’. Our community
matters—although heck, a lot of you are not
voting—for the ACH and ALLC elections, turnout
was around 30%. We need new blood in the asso-
ciations. We need people who are not just prepared
Digital Humanities in the Panopticon
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 265
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
to whine but prepared to roll up their sleeves and do
things to improve our associations, our community,
and our presence in academia. But the fact of the
matter remains: if we do not treat our research pres-
ence seriously, if we are not prepared to stick up for
DH, if we are not prepared to demonstrate our rele-
vance and our excellence and our achievements,
then the status of those working within DH
(including the relevance of digital scholarship, and
how it is treated by those in the Humanities) will
not improve, and we will be as impotent as we have
ever been. We should be demonstrating excellence
and cohesion and strength in numbers. We should
be prepared, as best we can, for whatever is coming
next in the financial downturn, and in academia. If
we self identify as DH—and I presume many of
those here at the conference would—then we need
to articulate what that means, and what is the point
of our community. It is the only way to prepare for
what is coming.
5 Homework
So far, so doom and gloom. But we are a commu-
nity who are full of those who like to do things, and
make things, and achieve things. And there are
plenty of practical things we can do to ensure the
continuation of our individual careers, our individ-
ual projects (such as Transcribe Bentham), our cen-
tres, and our teaching.
For the individual, we can be prepared by having
at the tip of our tongues what we do and why we
matter and why we should be supported and why
DH makes sense. (Those definitions of DH must be
personal, and must vary—but how many of us,
when asked to explain DH, go ‘well, its kinda the
intersection of . . .’—and you lost them at kinda.)
We need to have thought about the impact of our
work, and why it is relevant. When asked, or quer-
ied, about this (either in a personal or professional
setting) we should know. And it really does not hurt
to have learnt a little about the background of our
field, and its impact, and its successes, so we can
throw in a few ‘for examples’ when the blue-sky
nature of research pays off, and for when the appli-
cation of our research in the wider community
works, and for some major problems that need to
be solved about digital culture and use and tools
and why we are the people to do it.
Individuals can find support in networks of
scholars, and become active in communities
(both DH and individual subject organizations):
there is strength in numbers. Individuals can
take their digital identity seriously—let us show
other scholars and other disciplines how best to
proceed. We need to learn to play the academic
game with regard to publications, though, and
ensure all of our wonderful whizz bangy tools
are equally followed up with research papers in
important places, which is a bit of a bind, but
the only way with which to maintain and improve
our academic credentials at present. Individuals
can promote and be the advocates for DH, and
for DH-based research. We can also ensure that
we support the younger cohort and students and
young scholars who are just entering our field: it
is our role to be ambassadors for DH in every
way we can.
For those individuals who do have some man-
agement sway and some management clout, there is
also plenty that can be done to push forward the
DH agenda, within departments and institutions.
More support and kudos can be given to digital
scholarship and digital outputs within the huma-
nities, and this becomes something that can be
raised and pushed within institutional committee
structures, to ensure they count for hiring and pro-
motion and tenure. (Indeed, established devoted
tenure track posts for DH scholars may be some-
thing those in the USA could work towards.) Issues
of funding and employment for young scholars in
the discipline should be watched out for, including
the PhD and hiring/qualification issue, but this is
something that can be tackled through careful,
watchful leadership. My main advice to those in
DH management, though, would be to ensure you
fully embed your activities within institutional in-
frastructures: become indispensible. Get involved
with academic departments and service areas.
Provide advisory services and engage with as wide
a spectrum as people within your institution as you
can. Be ready to defend your staff and your projects
in the current financial climate, and be forewarned.
M. Terras
266 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
There is also strength in numbers in manage-
ment, in local, regional, national, and international
communities. Collaborations should be entered
into, rather than competition, to further embed
projects and people into the wider academic field.
Strategies and policies should be developed to deal
with the coming hardships that face us.
From an institutional point of view, building up
a centralized record of all the individuals and
projects involved in DH within an institution can
facilitate new research, and build on existing
strengths to make it clear where new research
opportunities may lie. I would suggest that DH cen-
tres should integrate closely with library systems
(and iSchools). Institutions can also support digital
outputs as being research in the internal promotion
of individual scholars. The establishment of teach-
ing programs (such as the new UCL Centre for
Digital Humanities MA in Digital Humanities,
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/dh/courses/mamsc) provides
essential training for young scholars entering our
field, and institutions should look to the opportu-
nities which exist in providing this graduate-level
training—which is sorely needed in our field.
Institutions can also encourage collaboration with
other institutions, and provide facilities, for ex-
ample, for visiting scholars, to encourage cross-
fertilization of teaching and research ideas.
The ADHO organizations can also do plenty to
maintain and support research, teaching, and the
DH community. Our digital presence should be
(and is being) sorted out as a matter of urgency.
Within those digital resources, ADHO and its con-
stituent organizations should provide the commu-
nity with the ammunition which is necessary to
defend DH as a relevant, useful, successful research
field. Information about the successes of DH can be
pushed, including projects and initiatives that have
been important to both our and other communities.
The value and impact of DH can be documented
and presented. A register of good projects can
also be maintained. Best practice in the running of
projects and centres can be pushed, and advice
given to those who need it in all matters of DH.
Collaboration should be encouraged, and the asso-
ciations should continue the work they are doing in
supporting young scholars. If anyone has any
further ideas, then please do contact the associ-
ations. They are there to help you.
My suggestions for funding agencies are relatively
succinct—I am not sure how much leeway they have
in providing funds at the moment, although it is
worth saying that certain funders (more than
others) have been and are being very supportive
to DH, and are engaged with and listening to our
community. We need financial support, both to
carry out blue-sky research, and to build DH infra-
structures. Funding agencies can also help with
the sustainability of projects, and in wrapping up
and archiving projects. They can aid, encourage,
and facilitate collaboration, and graduate research.
Considering the large investment that has been
made in DH, particularly over the past ten to fifteen
years, it makes sense for them to continue support-
ing us to ensure our research comes to fruition,
although we are all very aware of the changed finan-
cial academic world in which we live.
6 Wrapping up
This has been an honest tour of what DH means to
me, and some of the issues which DH is presented
with at the moment. It is been necessarily negative
in places. But I hope I have left you with the feeling
that there is proactive activity which we, as individ-
uals, departments, institutions, organizations, and
agencies can take to further entrench ourselves in
the humanities pantheon and to demonstrate that
we really are indispensible to the humanities.
I do not know what is going to happen with
Transcribe Bentham, whether the project itself will
be a success, whether the resulting transcriptions
will be accepted by the historical community, or
whether we will still have a funded project to talk
about in a year’s time, but for me it is part of the
learning curve to distil and understand how our
current research aims fit into the current academic
framework.
One thing I do know is that Jeremy Bentham
would have loved the fact that a picture of his
manky embalmed head was being broadcast on a
giant screen at King’s College London (especially
when involved with a speech that raises issues
Digital Humanities in the Panopticon
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 267
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
about KCL!). I have really enjoyed having the
chance to talk to you about my thoughts about
Transcribe Bentham, and the DH in general.
Thank you for listening in person, and see you on
Twitter, and in the Panopticon.
