Visual GISting: bringing together
corpus linguistics and Geographical
Information Systems
............................................................................................................................................................
Ian N. Gregory
Department of History, Lancaster University, Lancaster,
LA1 4YG, UK
Andrew Hardie
Department of Linguistics and English Language,
Lancaster University, Lancaster, LA1 4YL, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
Corpus linguistics and Geographical Information Systems (GIS) are approaches
exploiting computer-based methodologies in the study of, respectively, language
and language usage, and spatial patterns in geographical databases. We present an
approach that uses corpus methods to bridge the gap between the textual content
of a corpus (and, thus, the typically textual concerns of many branches of
the humanities) and the geo-referenced database at the heart of a GIS. Using
part-of-speech tagging to extract instances of proper nouns from a corpus, and a
gazetteer to limit these instances to those representing place–names, a database of
the places mentioned in a corpus can be created, visualized, and analysed using
GIS technology. It is also possible to visualize the meanings associated with par-
ticular place–names, by building GIS databases on the collocation of place–names
with particular semantic categories in their immediate context. In this way, we
can create maps that visualize the geographical distribution of mentions of con-
cepts such as war, government, or money in a particular data set. The approach
cannot be entirely automated and some manual intervention is required.
Nevertheless, the method is clearly valuable for the interpretation of spatial phe-
nomena in text corpora.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
This article is concerned with bringing together
two fields of research, corpus linguistics and
Geographical Information Systems (GIS), to allow
researchers to explore geographical patterns within
large textual data sets. Corpus linguistics is con-
cerned with using computer techniques to analyse
large bodies of text known as corpora. The
fundamental question asked is ‘what is the nature
of the usage of language within this corpus?’, where
the aspects of language to be investigated may en-
compass grammar, semantics, pragmatics, discourse
structure, and any of a range of issues related
to textual content (for overviews see Biber et al.,
1998; Adolphs, 2006; McEnery et al., 2006;
McEnery and Hardie, 2011). In contrast, the funda-
mental question asked of a GIS is ‘what are the
Correspondence:
Ian N. Gregory,
Department of History,
Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YG, UK.
E-mail:
i.gregory@lancaster.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
297
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr022 Advance Access published on 20 May 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
geographical patterns within this data set?’ (Longley
et al., 2001; Schuurman, 2004). In a GIS database,
each item of data is linked to a co-ordinate-based
location and this is fundamental to the retrieval,
analysis, and visualization of the data that it con-
tains. Both corpus linguistics and GIS have proven
highly successful approaches; however, the two have
traditionally had very little to do with each other—
corpus linguistics has largely ignored any spatial di-
mension within the texts that it studies, while GIS
has largely ignored qualitative data, particularly
textual data. Combining the two approaches in the
investigation of the spatial patterns found in large
bodies of text represents a methodological advance
for both fields, adding the geographical to corpus
analysis and the textual to GIS.
This article outlines how such a combined meth-
odology can be implemented, and provides some
examples of the potential that it has to shed new
insights into the geographies inherent within a text-
ual data set. In Section 2, we give brief background
overviews of corpus linguistics and GIS. Section 3
provides a general account of the methodology we
introduce and of the data set we use to exemplify
this approach, the Lancaster Newsbooks Corpus.
In Sections 4 and 5, we present case studies of two
sets of analyses that operationalize the general
approach.
2 Background: Corpus Linguistics
and GIS
2.1 Corpus methodology: in linguistics,
in the humanities, in geography
Although, there were earlier precursors (see
McEnery and Wilson, 2001, p. 2–4), corpus linguis-
tics may fairly be said to have emerged in the late
1950s and 1960s, with such pioneering work as the
construction of the original Survey of English
Usage,1 the development of the Brown Corpus of
American English (Francis and Kucˇera, 1964), and
John Sinclair’s early research on collocation
(Sinclair et al., 2004). Although initially a specialized
sub-field, since the 1990s corpus linguistics has in-
creasingly been adopted as a key component of the
methodological toolbox by linguists of many stripes.
The basis of all corpus methods is the computer-
aided analysis of very large bodies of text. The
most basic analyses that the computer can perform
are: (i) frequency counts of items such as words or
word sequences in the corpus and (ii) searches for
all instances of a particular linguistic form, usually a
word or phrase, in the corpus—the results of such
searches typically being displayed as a concordance
of each instance in context. However, much re-
search in corpus linguistics has been devoted to
the development of more complex methodologies.
While corpus-based approaches often utilize statis-
tical analysis—most notably, in dealing with corpus
frequencies—it is nonetheless a critical aspect of
corpus linguistics that it relies on both quantitative
and qualitative techniques (Biber et al., 1998, p. 4).
For instance, while the computer can produce a
concordance of a word, drawing meaningful conclu-
sions about the word requires a careful qualitative
analysis of the contents of that concordance.
Corpus-based approaches have many applica-
tions within linguistics. One of the most notable is
lexicography (see Ooi, 1998), in which field corpus
techniques are now all but indispensible. But cor-
pora have also been exploited for the study of
text-type variation (Biber, 1988) and dialect vari-
ation (Sampson, 2002); in the investigation of meta-
phor (Deignan, 2005); in literary stylistics (Culpeper
2002; Semino and Short, 2004; Mahlberg, 2007);
and in Critical Discourse Analysis (Baker, 2006;
Baker et al., 2008). There presently exist two
major schools of thought on the status of corpus
linguistics as a discipline (Hardie and McEnery,
2010). From one perspective, corpus linguistics is
seen as, in principle, an independent sub-field or
theory of language (Tognini-Bonelli, 2001, p. 1;
Teubert, 2005, p. 2); the other perspective sees
corpus linguistics primarily as a methodology cap-
able of being applied within a wide range of theor-
etical and analytical frameworks. From the latter
perspective, it is natural to consider how corpus
methods may be exploited in disciplines beyond
linguistics.
Many branches of the humanities focus on text-
ual evidence; whenever such evidence is considered
on the large scale, corpus methods may be of use.
However, to use corpus techniques in the field of
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
298 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
geography, a minimum requirement is that there be
some link between the capabilities of corpus meth-
ods, and the centrally spatial concerns of geography.
This link would seem to be most easily made in the
context of GIS—an approach to geographical
research which, like corpus linguistics, has exploited
computer resources to produce new analytic
methods.
2.2 GIS: in physical geography, in
historical geography, in the humanities
Although GIS is often thought of as a mapping tech-
nology, it is more accurately seen as a form of data-
base. A conventional relational database structures
data in tabular form, where each data object is a row
in the table, and the properties of the object are the
columns. In the specialized database that is a GIS,
data in this form are termed attribute data and each
row of attribute data is also linked to a geographical
reference termed the spatial data. In a vector GIS,
spatial data can take the form of a point, a line, or a
polygon (representing an area or zone); in a raster
GIS the spatial data takes the form of a fine grid of
pixels. The combination of attribute and spatial data
allows the data set to be structured, queried, visua-
lized, and analysed in ways that stress its geograph-
ical characteristics (Martin, 1996; Clarke, 1997;
Chrisman, 2002). Visualizing data through mapping
is clearly an important part of this type of analysis
but the use of GIS goes far beyond this; location is
inherent in all aspects of managing and researching
the data within a GIS.
GIS originated in the 1960s, partly in the military
and partly in the Earth sciences, and spread rapidly
into academic disciplines such as the environmental
sciences and physical geography (Coppock and
Rhind, 1991). Take-up in human geography was
slower because of debates over the quantitative
and positivist nature of GIS (see Johnston, 1999;
Pickles, 1999). Nevertheless, since the advent of
desktop GIS software in the mid-1990s, GIS has
become a standard tool within human geography.
More recently, use of GIS has increasingly spread
into various humanities disciplines. Significant pro-
gress has been made in history, to the extent that
Historical GIS is now a recognized field (Gregory
and Healey, 2007; Knowles, 2008). However, most
progress in Historical GIS has been made in areas
where quantitative source data is available and its
use accepted, including environmental history
(Cunfer, 2005), historical demography (Gregory,
2008), health and poverty (Dorling et al., 2000;
Gregory, 2009), medieval land-use (Campbell and
Bartley, 2006), economic history (Knowles and
Healey, 2006), and urban studies (Gordon, 2008).
Thus the majority of the most advanced projects
within Historical GIS are based primarily on nu-
meric (statistical) and cartographic sources. This
presents a major obstacle to the adoption of GIS
in the humanities more generally, as text (rather
than tables of statistics) is clearly the most widely
used form of data across the humanities (Jessop,
2008; Bodenhamer et al., 2010). While progress to
date within Historical GIS is encouraging, if GIS is
to become a widespread tool across the huma-
nities, it must be able to incorporate and embrace
text. Some progress has been made in developing
techniques for doing this to allow geographical
searching of certain corpora (Grover et al.,
2010); however we argue that the potential for
using texts within GIS goes far beyond this: it
must be possible to directly incorporate a text
into a GIS and the GIS must then be demonstrably
able to improve our understanding of a text or
body of texts.
This article will show that this can be accom-
plished by using certain corpus linguistic techniques
to mediate between the original, textual data and the
tabular, spatially referenced form required by a GIS.
The linguistic foundation of corpus-based meth-
odologies means that, critically, GIS databases can
be produced in which the meaning of the original
text is reflected in the geographical outputs. Thus,
qualitative content is preserved through the auto-
matic processes that produce a GIS from a text
corpus. In the remainder of the paper, we illustrate
two ways in which this general procedure can be
concretely operationalized. In Section 4, we outline
a basic technique for mapping mentions of place–
names found in a corpus within a GIS. In Section 5,
we outline a more sophisticated methodology which
exploits semantic tagging to produce GIS databases
which visualize topics, domains, or themes from
within a corpus.
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 299
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3 Data and Methodology
3.1 A corpus-based approach to the
generation of a GIS
Any data set explicitly or implicitly contains infor-
mation about space and time. That is, as well as
information that tells us what the data set is con-
cerned with; there is in addition information about
space telling us where the data set is concerned with;
and information about time telling us when it is
concerned with (Peuquet, 1994). The question of
what information is within the data set is the trad-
itional concern of corpus linguistics (in the broadest
sense of ‘information within’, referring not only to
the ‘message’ communicated but also the linguistic
system that carries the message). However, several
linguistic phenomena that may occur in a text are
implicitly or explicitly concerned with space. These
include, for instance, deixis (linguistic forms indi-
cating distance from or proximity to a speaker or
hearer), and prepositions and other markers of pos-
ition or direction—and also, perhaps most straight-
forwardly, place–names, that is, proper nouns
whose referent is a location. A simple geographical
question that can then be asked of the corpus is then
‘what places is the text discussing?’, a more compli-
cated question is ‘what is the text saying about these
places?’. If the text or its metadata also contains
temporal information—for example, in a corpus
of newspapers from different dates, diaries, or trav-
elogues—then an additional question can be asked,
namely ‘. . . and how does this change over time?’.2
To explore these types of questions effectively, it
is necessary to develop a technique for generating
a GIS on the basis of the place–names within
a corpus. We define each individual token of a
place–name in the corpus under consideration as a
mention. To preserve both the quantitative and
qualitative makeup of the corpus, each mention
must map to a single data object in the GIS.
Accomplishing this conversion requires four chal-
lenges to be overcome. First, all instances of place–
names within the text must be reliably identified.
Second, every occurrence of each relevant mention
of a place–name must be geo-referenced, that is,
associated with a co-ordinate that represents its
location.3 If a place–name is mentioned more than
once, the geo-referenced data will include multiple
(identical) data points to allow us to model these
multiple mentions. Third, the co-ordinates must be
converted into a GIS file format such as a Shapefile
for ArcGIS,4 or a Keyhole Markup Language (KML)
file for Google Earth5 or other virtual globes, and
finally once this has been visualized, subsequent
analysis needs to take place to explore and summar-
ize the spatial patterns within the corpus. Thus, like
corpus linguistics itself, the method we propose is
inherently both qualitative and quantitative: fre-
quency of mentions plays a role in the automatic
extraction of data for the GIS, but the resulting GIS
visualizations are analysed qualitatively and rely on
the analyst’s understanding of the socio-historical
context from which the original textual data
derived.
This methodology provides enough information
to enable the researcher to explore where the corpus
is talking about. In Section 4, we present an oper-
ationalization of this technique and consider what it
can tell us about our example corpus, at a relatively
broad-stroke level of description. Adding detailed
information about what the text is saying requires
an additional step of automated processing based on
the application of semantic tagging. In corpus ana-
lysis, tagging (or annotation) is a well-established
technique of labelling of all elements at some lin-
guistic level within a corpus according to their cat-
egory within a defined scheme of analysis (see
Leech, 1997). In the particular case of semantic tag-
ging, every word-token is labelled with a tag indicat-
ing its position within some ontology, that is, a
schema which categorizes its meaning. The tagger
and analytic schema used here is USAS, the
UCREL Semantic Analysis System6 (see Rayson,
2008). Our interest in the present context is in
what semantic tags co-occur or collocate with par-
ticular place–names (see Sinclair, 1991, p. 109–22
for an overview of collocation)—or, to look at it
another way, what place–names collocate with the
concepts indicated by particular semantic tags (as
we will illustrate in Section 5). The underlying
assumption of this analysis is that if a word with a
particular semantic tag occurs in proximity to a
place–name, then the concept indicated by that tag
is relevant to that place. This assumption will clearly
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
300 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
not be true in every case. However, since this ana-
lysis is conducted across the entirety of a large
corpus, spurious instances will be outweighed by
genuine examples of meaningful relationships that
reflect what is being said about places in the corpus.
3.2 Example data set: the Lancaster
newsbooks corpus
As a testbed data set, we utilize a subsection of the
Lancaster Newsbooks Corpus.7 This is a collection
of all of the surviving news periodicals printed in
London between mid-December 1653 and the end
of May 1654 (Hardie and McEnery, 2009; Prentice
and Hardie, 2009). The subsection of the corpus
that we use consists of approximately 870,000
words of material that is highly relevant to the
social and political history of a turbulent period.
The Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell was instituted
in December 1653; the corpus also covers the latter
part of the Glencairn Uprising, a Royalist rebellion
against Cromwell’s rule in Scotland, named after its
leader. Also during these 5 months, a peace treaty
between England and Holland was being concluded,
and Queen Christina of Sweden abdicated and con-
verted to Catholicism. Though this data set is rela-
tively small by the standards of corpus linguistics, it
is large enough to make a hand-and-eye analysis
prohibitively time-consuming. Moreover, the geo-
graphical spread of the events known to be of his-
torical interest within this text collection makes it an
excellent testbed data set. It should, however, be
noted that these techniques are equally applicable
to modern sources as they are to historic ones.
4 From a Corpus to a GIS: Mapping
Mentions
The first stage in converting a corpus to a GIS is to
identify and extract the place–names from within
the text. The theory of doing this is relatively
straightforward; place–names are, by definition,
proper nouns and technologies to extract proper
nouns are well established. In particular, part-of-
speech (POS) tagging, another form of corpus an-
notation, can be undertaken automatically and will
typically distinguish proper nouns from all other
word classes, including common nouns, to a high
degree of accuracy. We tagged the whole corpus
using the CLAWS8 software, and then extracted
every instance of words tagged as proper nouns.9
This list of proper-noun tokens is taken to include
all potential place–names within the corpus.
The next stage of the procedure is to identify
which proper nouns are actually place–names.
This involves using a place–name gazetteer to allo-
cate co-ordinates to each of the words found within
the gazetteer, while at the same time removing from
the list those proper nouns not found in the gazet-
teer and thus deemed not to be place–names.
A place–name gazetteer, sometimes also known as
a thesaurus, is basically a database table linking
place–names to co-ordinates. The co-ordinates are
typically in the form of latitude and longitude for
international material, or Eastings and Northings
for British or Irish places. Gazetteers often also
hold additional information such as variant spel-
lings; position within an administrative hierarchy,
such as which county or state the place lies within;
what type of feature the name refers to, such as
town, river, mountain, and so on; and perhaps
some statistics such as population or area. A
number of broad-coverage place–name gazetteers
are currently available, including the Ordnance
Survey’s (OS) 1:50,000 gazetteer, which provides
Eastings and Northings for every place–name on
the OS’s Landranger maps of Britain,10 and the
GeoNames11 and World-Gazetteer12 websites
which provide freely available and downloadable
gazetteers for the whole world, giving latitudes
and longitudes for each location. In this case
World-Gazetteer was used; however, the choice of
which gazetteer to use with a particular corpus re-
quires careful consideration and a different gazetteer
might well be more appropriate for other studies or
applications.
The first stage in using a gazetteer to geo-reference
a list of proper nouns is to filter both the list of
proper nouns and the gazetteer to remove unneces-
sary information. The list of proper nouns can be
filtered to remove obvious non-place–names, such
as words preceded by Mr, Ms, Duke of and so on.
The gazetteer can also be simplified to remove areas
known in advance to be irrelevant to the corpus at
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 301
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
hand. For the 1654 newsbooks, we removed all
references to places outside Europe and the
Mediterranean as there were few, if any, mentions
of places further afield. This prevents a token such
as Lancaster, for instance, from generating a mention
linked to Lancaster, California or Lancaster, Ontario.
A relational join between the list of proper nouns and
the gazetteer then gives a first pass at geo-referencing
the data set, in the form of a table or view of the data
that gives for each instance, at minimum, the place–
name and the co-ordinates of its location. Crucially,
the data objects in this table consist of mentions—
specific instances of a place–name occurring at a par-
ticular point in the corpus—and thus the same
place–name and associated co-ordinates can (and
in fact do) occur many times in the table.
This is the most difficult stage of the operation,
and one in which some user interaction in inevit-
able. The precise amount of manual intervention
that is required will vary according to the number
of place–names within the text and the level of ac-
curacy required. There are many potential problems
distinguishing place–names from other proper
nouns. One problem is that many proper-noun
word-forms can be names of people as well as
names of places. For instance, relative to Lancaster
as the name of a city, names such as Roy Lancaster,
the Duke of Lancaster, and the Lancaster Bomber are
potential problems. Another problem is the disam-
biguation of place–names that can refer to more
than one place such as Newcastle, Newton, or
Richmond. Our first-pass approach was to produce
multiple place–name mentions from each instance
of such an ambiguous word-form, that is, to gener-
ate one mention for each possible location, but then
to allow subsequent manual disambiguation and re-
moval of the spurious cases. An automated ap-
proach to disambiguation based on the type of
place, its size, or its proximity to other places may
be possible but is likely to be error prone. A third
problem is that, even with modern material, the
same place–name can be spelt in a number of
ways, such as Newcastle-on-Tyne versus Newcastle
upon Tyne, or Saint Helen’s versus St. Helens. With
historical material, where spelling variation is the
rule rather than the exception (see Pilz et al.,
2008), or material where standards of data
capture may be poor, this problem may be
exacerbated.13
The table of mentions which results from the
procedure outlined above can easily be converted
into a GIS format. In a GIS the basic unit of storage
combining attribute and spatial data is termed the
layer (or sometimes coverage or theme). In this case,
for each mention, the place–name is its attribute
data and the co-ordinates are its spatial data. Most
GIS software packages can convert tables with
co-ordinate data into layers of point data; an alter-
native approach is to convert the table into KML
format for use in Google Earth or other virtual
globes.
Figure 1 shows a GIS produced from the first
pass of extracting place–names from the Lancaster
Newsbooks Corpus. No initial attempts to clean this
data set have been made; a total of 8,430 provisional
place–names were mapped and every mention is
represented as a single point on the GIS. Although
the spread of points is at first glance interesting,
there are a number of features, such as the surpriz-
ingly large number of mentions of Eastern European
places, which suggest errors or noise within the data
set and alert us to the need to check these further.
It is well known in the cartographic literature
that dot maps of this sort are difficult to interpret
when they show a large amount of overlapping data
(Robinson et al., 1995). To simplify the pattern and
make it more comprehensible a technique called
density smoothing can be used. This was originally
pioneered in disciplines such as epidemiology and
criminology. The idea behind it is that, rather than
measure discrete events at precisely defined loca-
tions, the varying intensity of events near each lo-
cation is measured. Rather than using point data in
a vector system, a raster system is used, in which the
density of events near each pixel is measured, with
nearer events having more influence than those fur-
ther away (see for example, Bailey and Gatrell, 1995
or Lloyd, 2007). This is relatively simple to imple-
ment with GIS software. The result of applying the
technique to the provisional data is shown in Fig. 2,
where a clearer pattern emerges. The majority of
mentions are concentrated across England and cen-
tral Scotland. Beyond this, there are some distinct
clusters, particularly around Paris, Bordeaux, what
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
302 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
is today the Netherlands, and Hamburg, and less
dense clusters near Stockholm, Rome, and Naples.
That most news reported in the London press
concerns England is not particularly surprizing.
Equally, many locations where mentions cluster
outside the British Isles can also be identified and
are usually explicable in terms of the presentation of
news in seventeenth century journalism. News from
a particular correspondent was typically headed by a
statement of where they wrote from and when their
letter was dated, for instance ‘From Hamburgh
December 20’ (in Mercurius Politicus issue 186).
News reported from a given location might well
originate elsewhere; in the issue cited, the news
‘[f]rom Hamburgh’ included tidings from the
Hague, Stockholm, and the Holy Roman
Emperor’s court. So while places discussed in the
news attract mentions, so too do places that are
Fig. 1 A first pass of mapping the Lancaster Newsbooks Corpus using a dot map
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 303
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
conduits for news—such as Paris, Hamburg, and
Rotterdam. On the other hand, as is often the case
with mapping, absence can be as interesting as pres-
ence. Notably absent from the pattern in Fig. 2 are
any major clusters in places including Spain,
Portugal, Africa, and Greece. Tentatively, this may
illustrate how marginal (most of) the Mediterranean
is to the concerns of English consumers of news at
this period, compared to the English Channel and
the North Sea. The key point, however, is that we
believe that this is the first time that techniques to
demonstrate and quantify the geographical distribu-
tions within texts have been developed.
Figures 1 and 2 represent the data before any
effort was made to filter out noise. But exploring
maps of this sort is in fact an effective means for
spotting errors—by querying clusters and distinct
outliers, we can discover the reasons for consistent
Fig. 2 A density smoothed map of provisional place–names mentioned in the Lancaster Newsbooks Corpus
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
304 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
distortions. For instance, there is a cluster of men-
tions near Manchester caused by the word
Middleton. It turns out that this is almost always
General Middleton or Gen. Middleton, who was a
military leader in the Glencairn Uprising. This indi-
cates the need for filtering of the list of potential
place–names to remove words preceded by titles
that indicate a name of a human being. Another
type of error is where names are linked to the
wrong place. An example of this is the cluster on
the west coast of Ireland, which overwhelmingly
consists of mentions of Newcastle. Checking the ori-
ginal text strongly suggests that the reference is in
fact to Newcastle upon Tyne in the north–east of
England so the database needs to be updated ac-
cordingly, making these mentions match only
Newcastle upon Tyne and not Newcastle in
Ireland. Likewise, among the outliers in Eastern
Europe, five of the fourteen mentions in what is
now Romania are to Victoria or Alexandria.
Checking these back with the text shows that these
too are people, not places, and they can thus be
removed from the list.
Figure 3 shows the same map of the data once it
has been cleaned. This reduces the number of pro-
visional place–names from 8,430 to 6,297. The sum-
mary pattern shown by Fig. 3 is not, however, very
different from the uncleaned pattern shown in
Fig. 2. The most noticeable difference is the loss of
the cluster around the Irish Newcastle. There has
also been some downgrading of the clusters along
the eastern border of France and the loss of some
outliers in eastern Europe. It is probably fair to say
that the cleaning renders the clusters that remain, in
England, Paris, and the Dutch coast, more pro-
nounced rather than less.
Figure 4 maps the mentions of place–names
within Britain and Ireland. London is far and
away the most mentioned place; otherwise there
are prominent clusters in Edinburgh, Newcastle
and Plymouth, and lesser clusters in Cornwall (pri-
marily Falmouth), in Dover, along the Severn
Estuary (Bristol and Gloucester), around the
Glasgow area, and in Aberdeen and Inverness. The
west coast of Scotland and much of Ireland, espe-
cially what is now Northern Ireland, are noticeable
for their relative lack of mentions. The two clusters
in central Scotland illustrate another advantage of
this form of mapping: there are 173 mentions of
Edinburgh, making it the third most-named place
in Britain and Ireland; however, nearby Dalkeith
provides an additional ninety-six mentions, greatly
enhancing this cluster. The Glasgow cluster actually
stretches from Falkirk in the east to Ayr in the
south–west, taking in a total of 218 mentions.
The place–names mentioned are Stirling (fifty
mentions), Glasgow (45), Ayr (33), Renfrew (25),
Dumbarton (23), and fourteen other places. If
each location were considered in isolation, the
newsbooks’ interest in this part of the country
would not be clear; however, once the data is visua-
lized, its relevance becomes obvious.
5 From a Corpus to a GIS:
Mapping Meaning
The previous section illustrated two key points: (i) it
is possible to map a text and discern interesting
patterns in the result; (ii) place–names are problem-
atic, and moving from automated extraction of
proper nouns to a definitive list of disambiguated
place–name mentions requires a significant amount
of user intervention, which while time-consuming,
is achievable. This simple spatial visualization brings
out some of the geographical structure of the
corpus’ content that is of interest to the researcher;
however, a more interesting question is not simply
where is being talked about but also what is being
said about these places. It is in this context that the
collocation of place–names with particular semantic
tags, discussed in Section 3.1 above, becomes
relevant.
Using the semantically tagged version of the
corpus, we once again extracted all instances of
proper nouns as candidate place–names. However,
in this case, we extracted: (i) not only the instance of
the word itself, but also the five words before and
the five words after it and (ii) not only the actual
words, but also their semantic tags. A five-word
span before and after a word of interest is often
used as the ‘window’ of collocation in computation-
al linguistics (Seretan and Wehrli, 2007, p. 75).
Some other researchers limit the study of
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 305
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
collocation to looking at syntactically related tokens
(for instance, the object of a verb, the adjective
modifying a noun: see Grefenstette, 1992; Evert,
2005). However, in this case our specific interest
was in what was said nearby to the place–name men-
tions, not in any particular syntactic relationship,
and so proximity-based collocation was a better fit
to our research aims. The data was filtered using the
gazetteer, and coordinates added, as before. The
result was a database where each entry contains a
great deal of information about the semantic con-
text of a given instance of a place–name, and which
could be queried in two ways: to extract all the se-
mantic tags found in the vicinity of any mention of
a given place–name, or to extract all instances of
place–names that have a given semantic tag in
their immediate neighbourhood. The first type of
query can help us get a handle on what is said
Fig. 3 A density smoothed map of cleaned place–names mentioned in the Lancaster Newsbooks Corpus
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
306 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
about a particular place. Although this is useful, our
focus here is on the second type of query, because it
generates a subset of geo-referenced mentions found
to be associated with a particular semantic tag, and
this subset can be mapped.
An example of how this works is shown in
Table 1, which shows the entry for a mention of
Dunkirk from fairly early in the corpus (a newsbook
published on 10 January 1654). The ten words of
context contains ‘. . . of a rich Fleet from Dunkirk,
consisting of about forty . . .’ (The scripts that gen-
erate this database treat the comma as a separate
word-token.) Many of the tags are not of interest
for our purposes, including Z5 (grammar bin) and
N1 (a number). The tags A1:8þ and A13:4, subca-
tegories of category A, general and abstract terms, are
potentially more interesting, although interpreting
the relationship between concepts such as approxi-
mation and inclusion and a geographical location
would be a challenge. More concrete, and therefore
straightforwardly interpretable, is the association of
Dunkirk with the word rich, tagged I1:1þ, a subcat-
egory of I1 which covers all meanings related to
money. If we query the database for mentions of
Fig. 4 A density smoothed map of place–names mentioned in Britain and Ireland
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 307
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
place–names associated with this tag for money, this
instance will be retrieved, and can be plotted in a
GIS. If there are many such instances in the corpus
as a whole, the visualized GIS for ‘money’ will show
a cluster at Dunkirk just as, in the overall visualiza-
tions discussed above, there are clusters at Paris and
Hamburg. If this is the only association of Dunkirk
with money, in contrast, it will be outweighed by the
mass of other place–name mentions linked to
money elsewhere. Given that much naval activity
in the seventeenth century was concerned with cap-
turing enemy ships for profit, it does not seem un-
likely that this pattern should in fact be repeated.
Table 1 illustrates another important point. The
word Fleet has been tagged as a geographical name;
this is incorrect and it should have been tagged M4
(for travel by water). However, this is a single error
in a very large corpus. If the association of Dunkirk
with matters naval is consistent, as we might expect,
instances of Dunkirk in association with other M4
words will outweigh the single instance here and
produce a suitable cluster in the GIS.
An example of a query for a semantic category
being mapped in a GIS is given in Fig. 5. G3 indi-
cates war. There are 360 mentions of place–names
with words tagged G3 nearby; these mentions refer
to a total of ninety-three distinct places. Figure 5
shows that references to war are particularly con-
centrated in central and eastern Scotland—a clear
reflection of the Royalist uprising being given sub-
stantial coverage in the newsbooks. While Aberdeen
is the most-mentioned place (thirty-four mentions),
the cluster encompasses twenty-six separate places–
names with a clear spatial distribution across the
Lowlands and up the east coast. Brest attracts
twenty-five mentions in relation to war, second
only to Aberdeen. Unlike the Scottish distribution,
this is an isolated point. Many of the mentions are
of the Brest men of war, where Brest is simply men-
tioned as the home port of ships involved in naval
conflict; this explains why only one place, and not
an area, is mentioned here. London also attracts
many mentions, as does northern France and the
Netherlands.
Figure 6 shows a density smoothed map of place–
names near a word-token tagged as G1, government.
London is the most-mentioned place, followed by
Rome. The Edinburgh and Newcastle area receives a
large numbers of mentions, as does the Rotterdam
and Amsterdam area. Bordeaux, Cologne, and
Venice also have clusters of mentions. Figure 7
shows the pattern for I1, money. It is noticeably
different to the pattern for government shown in
Fig. 6. While London remains important, it is less
dominant than for government. The whole east
coast of Britain receives mentions based partly
on Edinburgh and Newcastle, places of recurring
importance, but also on Scarborough—driven by
mentions relating to prize ships—and a cluster of
places in East Anglia including Framlingham and
Debenham—driven by discussions of work to re-
lieve the poor. Paris, barely mentioned in relation
to government, comes out strongly in relation to
money, with Amsterdam and Rotterdam providing
a lesser cluster. In North Africa, Tunis and Tripoli
provide clusters that prove to be spurious. The em-
phasis on Tunis results from several instances of the
report ‘they shall call the Turks to an account at
Tunis, or Algier, for the wrongs they have done’.
The word account here is being used metaphorically,
with the conceptual link to money indirect and thus,
less relevant for our purposes. Polysemy is an issue
that the semantic tagger unaided often struggles
with. Tripoli, meanwhile, was itself (incorrectly)
tagged as related to money, rather than as a geo-
graphical term.
Table 1 Semantically tagged database entry for one instance of the word Dunkirk
Preceding context Following context
5 Left 4 3 2 1 Left 1 Right 2 3 4 5 Right
of a rich Fleet from Dunkirk , consisting of about forty
Z5 Z5 I1:1þ Z2 Z5 Z2 A1:8þ Z5 A13:4 N1
The tags are: Z2 geographical names; Z5 grammar bin; I1:1þ money—affluence (positive); A1:8þ inclusion/exclusion (positive);
A13:4 degree—approximators; N1 numbers.
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
308 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
6 Conclusion
We propose the term Visual GISting for the joint
corpus-linguistic/GIS method outlined above, since
the abstractions created across many instances of
semantic tags constitute in some respect the gist of
the content of the corpus, and the use of GIS tech-
niques allows these content summaries to be ren-
dered visually. It is, we would argue, a technique
that enables corpus analysts to think geographically
just as it enables GIS specialists to exploit textual
data. Our examples here focused on news text and
news collection in a particular historical period;
however, we would argue, there is no reason to
think that it could not be generally applicable to
a wide range of research questions in geography
and in the humanities. The approach could be
applied to any study that wants to ask geographical
Fig. 5 Mapping war: references to places near a word tagged as G3
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 309
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
research questions of a corpus that contains place–
names.
That said, the analyses presented above are no
more than pilot studies. We have barely scraped
the surface of the patterns within just the
Lancaster Newsbooks Corpus. Moreover, there is
clearly room for improvement to the procedure
we have outlined. The data resources utilized,
most critically the gazetteer, play a crucial role: the
GIS output is only as good as the database that
produces it. An improved gazetteer, for example
one with information to assist in disambiguation
of same-name places, would enhance the output.
In a similar way, the incorporation into our
method of Named Entity Extraction approaches
could help automate the distinction between
place–names and personal names. Another useful
extension would be to assess the effect of applying
Fig. 6 Mapping government: references to places near a word tagged as G1
I. N. Gregory and A. Hardie
310 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
different models of collocation when identifying
co-occurrence of place–names and semantic tags.
The proximity-based approach to collocation
which we applied is very common in corpus linguis-
tics (Sinclair, 1991; Sinclair et al., 2004); however,
other approaches exist and could be used within our
method, such as considering words to collocate if
they appear anywhere in the same document (or
news story in our example) regardless of actual dis-
tance (Kim and Choi, 1999). The syntax-based ap-
proach to collocation mentioned in Section 5,
although not adopted in the analysis presented
here, is another possibility for further exploration.
However, while these and other aspects of the
technique could be refined, it is our judgement
that there will always need to be some user
Fig. 7 Mapping finance: references to places near a word tagged as I1
Corpus linguistics and GIS
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 311
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
intervention in the process of moving from a con-
cordance of proper nouns, to a disambiguated and
clean list of place–name mentions with coordinates.
A wholly automated computation of a semantic
visualization from a corpus would be possible, but
probably unsatisfactory due to spurious place–name
matches and the other problems illustrated in
this article. In this way, Visual GISting inherits a
key trait of corpus linguistics: that quantitative
and qualitative analysis, both automatically gener-
ated outputs and hand-and-eye techniques, are
indispensable.
