The concept of evolution in the
Origin of Species: a computer-
assisted analysis
............................................................................................................................................................
Maxime B. Sainte-Marie, Jean-Guy Meunier, Nicolas Payette and
Jean-Franc¸ois Chartier
Universite´ du Que´bec a` Montre´al (UQAM), Laboratoire d’analyse
cognitive de l’information (LANCI), Montreal, Quebec, Canada
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
At the time Darwin first published the Origin of Species, the word ‘evolution’ was
used by most biologists of the time to refer not only to specific development, as is
the case today, but also to embryological development. Darwin’s own stance in
that matter is however open to debate, his rare use of the word making it hard to
determine whether it is strictly specific or dual, and thus whether the author’s
conception of evolution is representative or ahead of its time. While this situation
certainly stimulates philological, historical, and philosophical debates, it however
complicates any attempt to settle the matter on a strict lexical basis, thus making
standard text-mining techniques ineffective. To address this specific issue, a
computer-assisted method for ‘reading Darwin between the lines’ is here at-
tempted and described: by using an iterative concordance clustering algorithm,
this approach aims at ‘digging’ into Darwin’s concept of evolution as found in
the sixth edition of the Origin of Species, regardless of any proper designation.
In light of the results thus obtained, the concept of evolution in the sixth edition
of the Origin of Species appears closer to its modern and strictly specific inter-
pretation, inferences made to words related to embryological development being
rather rare.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
Whereas Darwin is nowadays considered the foun-
der of the modern theory of evolution, he was not
the first to use this word in a biological context:
as noted a while ago by Thomas Henry Huxley in
his 1878 article on evolution published in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica, the word ‘evolution’ had
two distinct biological uses at the time the Origin of
Species was first published: first, to refer to embryo-
logical development; and second, ‘to characterize
the general belief that species have descended from
one another over time’ (Richards, 1992).
The word ‘evolution’ was first used in biology to
refer to the development of the embryo, mainly
through the formulation, promulgation, and justifi-
cation of both preformationist and epigenetical the-
ories. Through the diffusion, adoption (by E´tienne
Renaud Serres, notably), and rejection (by von Baer,
among others) of Lamarck’s ideas of transmutation
and of recapitulationism (the idea that embryologic-
al ‘evolution’ recapitulates specific ‘evolution’), the
word evolution later came to be also related to spe-
cific development: ‘by the 1830s, the word ‘evolu-
tion’ had shifted 180 degrees from its original
employment and was used to refer indifferently to
both embryological and species progression’
(Richards, 1992). This dual use of the word was
Correspondence:
Maxime B. Sainte-Marie,
Universite´ du Que´bec a`
Montre´al (UQAM),
Laboratoire d’analyse
cognitive de l’information
(LANCI),
455 Rene´-Le´vesque E., Suite
W-5350, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada H2L 4Y2
E-mail:
msaintemarie@gmail.com
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
329
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr019 Advance Access published on 16 May 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
still well in effect at the time Darwin wrote his per-
ennial book: in his 1852 essay ‘The development
hypothesis’, Herbert Spencer (1820–1903) openly
supports transmutation and refers to it as the
Theory of Evolution, while pointing ‘to embryologic-
al ‘‘evolution’’ as an illustration of the ability of
organic structures to modify themselves’ (Bowler,
1975).
1 Embryological and Specific
Evolution in the Origin of Species:
Lexical and Conceptual Issues
Despite the well-established nature of this semantic
duality, Darwin’s own stance on this specific issue
in the Origin of Species is rather hard to determine:
while the Origin of Species is generally considered
as the birth document of the theory of evolution,
studies on and around this book often emphasize
the fact that the word itself as well as its derivatives
are rarely used by Darwin. In the first (24 November
1859), second (7 January 1960), third (March 1861)
and fourth (June 1866) editions, there is only one
occurrence related to ‘evolution: evolved’ is the last
word of the last sentence of the work, the famous
‘Tangled Banks’ passage. In the fifth edition (1869),
the same term ‘evolved’ appears a second time, the
first occurrence appearing in the fourteenth chapter
and the second at the same last spot as in the earlier
editions. Only in the last edition (1872) are the term
‘evolution’ and its derivatives more extensively and
systematically employed (for a more detailed
account, see Table 1) (Darwin, 2002–09).
This lexical scarcity has often been stressed by
scholars and specialists. Most of them consider
this paucity intentional, as thought Darwin express-
ly wanted to avoid the word: ‘for Darwin, and many
other English naturalists of his era, ‘‘evolution’’ was
an ambiguous word. It evoked various theories that
closely associated the history of species with both
individual development and an overall progression-
ist interpretation of the history of nature’ (Gayon,
2003).
The fact that the word itself is rarely found does
not necessarily mean, however, that Darwin’s con-
cept of evolution is without substance: even though
‘evolution’, ‘evolved’, and ‘evolve’ do not appear
often, the concept they refer to may well lay else-
where, ‘between the lines’. In order to understand
this and make the following conceptual analysis
possible, a fundamental cognitive and functional
distinction must thus be made between the pro-
cesses of conceptualization and lexicalization. For
that matter, a quick glimpse into distributional se-
mantics (Harris, 1991) might be in order.
According to this theory, meaning can be more
easily stated as a property of word combinations
than of words per se: ‘similarities and patternings
among the co-occurrence likelihoods of various
words correlate with similarities and patternings
in their types of meaning’ (Harris, 1991). In every
sentence and paragraph, each word brings its own
constraints to the whole, reduces the sets of possible
words that could fit therein, therefore increasing
the total information conveyed and structuring the
semantic dimension of each word thus combined.
Thus, meaning is not ‘in’ the words themselves but
‘between’ them, that is, in the word combination
networks in which they take part, that determine
what other words might co-occur with them and
what overall meaning might thus be conveyed.
Now, since the linguistic expression of a concept
is structured and constrained by these word com-
binations, it would then be possible to analyze con-
cepts on the basis of the lexical co-occurrence
networks that regularly express them, whether
these concepts are properly lexicalized or not.
In view of this, the fact that the word ‘evolution’
itself is rarely found in the sixth edition of the
Table 1 Occurrences of ‘evolution’, ‘evolve’, and
‘evolved’ in the Origin of Species
First edition (one) evolved: XV (490)
Second edition (one) evolved: XV (490)
Third edition (one) evolved: XV (525)
Fourth edition (one) evolved: XV (577)
Fifth edition (two) evolved: XIV (573), XV (579)
Sixth edition
(fourteen)
evolution: (VII: 201(two), 202),
VIII (215), X (282), XV (424 (three))
evolve: VII (191)
evolved: VII (191, 202(two)),
XV (425, 429)
M. B. Sainte-Marie et al.
330 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Origin of Species does not necessarily imply that
the lexical environments in which it appears and
that shape its meaning cannot be found elsewhere
in the text (i.e. where the concept is not properly
lexicalized) in a rather similar fashion (except for
the occurrence of the word ‘evolution’, of course)
and cannot be analyzed in order to better extract the
lexical co-occurrence network shaping the concept’s
meaning. In other words, taking into account text
segments similar to those where the word ‘evolu-
tion’ occurs might be the most reliable way to
determine whether or not Darwin’s concept of
evolution in the Origin of Species refers to both
embryological and specific development, like most
biological theories of the same period. For that
purpose, the use of text-mining strategies, which
help to emphasize textual regularities and patterns
that would be difficult to identify otherwise
(Meunier et al., 2005), might seem here natural,
even necessary. However, due to the lexical scarcity
of ‘evolution’, ‘evolve’, and ‘evolved’ in the Origin of
Species, a new text-mining methodology is needed,
one that aims to identify the word combinations
shaping up the semantic dimension of concepts,
independently of their lexicalization.
2 Methodology
Theoretically speaking, the concept-mining ap-
proach developed and described here is based on
a few linguistic and cognitive assumptions, shown
in Table 2.
The main objective of the following method is to
extract the text segments most similar to those in
which the word referring to the analyzed con-
cept occurs, in order to identify as many of the
different, concept- and semantic-shaping, lexical
co-occurrence and inference patterns as possible.
In order to accomplish this, the following
method has been developed: after an initial cluster-
ing of the corpus to be analyzed, the word that has
the highest TF.IDF rating (Term Frequency –
Inverted Document Frequency) is extracted for
each cluster in which a text segment containing
the word analyzed (here ‘evolution’, ‘evolve’, or
‘evolved’) is found. This should allow for the extrac-
tion of the words that have the strongest
co-occurrence link with the term to be analyzed.
Then, a concordance for each of these retrieved
words is created by collecting each text segment in
which the said word occurs, and the same oper-
ations of clustering, cluster selection, TF.IDF
rating and ranking, occurrence-based word selec-
tion, and concordance extraction are performed
on each of those new concordances, until no new
highest TF.IDF-ranked word is found or no more
text segments containing the word(s) analyzed
are found in the clusters. Table 3 summarizes the
different steps of this concordance-clustering
algorithm:
This approach is not entirely automatic, though,
given that some intervention is required for prepro-
cessing the corpora to be analyzed, choosing the
clustering algorithm and parameters as well as in-
terpreting the results obtained. However, since these
specific activities are rather characteristic of any
computer-assisted text analysis method, the present
algorithm might be considered as automatic as it
could possibly be.
Table 2 Fundamental hypotheses of the present concept-mining method
1 A concept is linguistically expressed in a differentiated, contextualized, and regularized manner by a lexical network that shapes
its semantic dimension through co-occurrence constraints.
2 Meaning conferred by lexical co-occurrences is independent of the corresponding concept’s lexicalization.
3 The meaning of a concept can be analyzed through lexical co-occurrence patterns that are similar to those in which the given
concept is properly lexicalized.
4 The lexical co-occurrence network specific to a given concept can be identified through concordance analysis.
5 The lexical co-occurrence network characteristic of concepts can be formally represented using vectorial algebra (‘bag of word’
method), given that the corpus to be analyzed is converted into a matrix.
6 Lexical co-occurrence pattern identification analysis can be done using algorithmic and automatic clustering methods
The concept of evolution in the Origin of Species
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 331
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
3 Preliminary Experimentations
and Results
In order to apply this method to the concept of
evolution in the Origin of Species, a few decisions
in parameterization had to be taken beforehand.
Since the sixth edition of the Origin of Species is
the one in which ‘evolution’ and its derivatives
occur the most, it has been chosen as the experi-
mentation corpus for the present research. The pre-
processing was done as follows: each of the 9442
different words that the sixth edition contains is
considered a basic information unit, and each of
its 974 paragraphs a vector of the whole matrix.
Each vector of this matrix has thus 9442 dimen-
sions, corresponding to the different information
units contained in the corpus; the value of each
vector dimension is then determined by the fre-
quency of the corresponding unit in the corres-
ponding paragraph.
Clustering was done using K-Means, at a ratio
of one centroı¨d for each ten segments. Also, in
order to identify the principal lexical constituents
of the concept of evolution and determine whether
or not this underlying conceptual structure includes
references to both embryological and specific pro-
cesses, two different analyses were made: the first
one only aimed at the word ‘evolution’, while
the second one also added ‘evolve’ and ‘evolved’.
Results of these two analyses are shown in Figs 1
and 2 respectively.
Figure 1 shows the results of the first analysis,
that of ‘evolved’. Of all the conceptual paths that
were ‘dug’, only one stops rather shortly: it is the
one with the word baleen as its most characteristic
word. Of the rest, four (‘naturalists’, ‘change’,
‘cuckoo’, ‘new’) dig into what seems to be the
specific dimension of the word ‘evolution’: in add-
ition to a couple of names referring to groups
of different taxonomic rank (cuckoos, selaceans),
words such as ‘varieties’, ‘variations’, ‘spreading’,
‘reversions’ and ‘change’ are all closer to specific
aspects of development than of embryological
ones. As for the last starting path of analysis, ‘indi-
viduals’, the embryological dimension seems preg-
nant, especially as the clustering of this word’s
concordance leads to ‘eggs’ as being the most
characteristic of the class in which ‘evolution’
occurs. However, the chain stops there, for want
of any co-occurrence of ‘eggs’ and ‘evolution’,
as if Darwin specifically intended not to associate
‘evolution’ with ‘eggs’, which doubtlessly constitutes
one of the words with the strongest embryological
connotation.
Figure 2 shows that the addition of ‘evolve’ and
‘evolved’ radically changes the analysis’ results.
Some of the new words extracted play a crucial
Table 3 Iterative concordance clustering algorithm
1. Concordance extraction For each cluster containing the word(s) analyzed, extract the concordance of the highest TF.IDF-ranked
word.
2. Concordance clustering For each previously unselected word, proceed to the clustering of its concordance.
3. Iteration Return to Step 1, unless (1) no new highest TF.IDF-ranked word is found, or (2) no clusters containing
the word(s) to be analyzed are found.
Fig. 1 Conceptual analysis of evolution
M. B. Sainte-Marie et al.
332 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
role in Darwin’s transmutation theory: species,
forms, genera, conditions, formations, variable,
groups, families, branches, descendants, and in-
stincts. References are made to words previously
processed, and such inferential ‘redundancies’
seem to give them additional relevance of signifi-
cance: ‘formations’ and ‘conditions’ both refer to
‘forms’; ‘variations’ to ‘abrupt’; ‘species’ and ‘con-
ditions’ to ‘variations’; ‘formations’, ‘fatal’, ‘forma-
tion’, ‘change’, and ‘genera’ to ‘species’; ‘species’,
‘larger’, and ‘varieties’ to ‘genera’. Many words
also refer to each other, and such bidirectionality
seems to be the sign of a strong semantic connection
between the words implied : ‘cuckoo’ and ‘instincts’,
‘species’ and ‘genera’, ‘species’ and ‘fatal’, ‘species’
and ‘change’, ‘species’ and ‘formations’, ‘vari-
ations’ and ‘abrupt’, ‘genera’ and ‘larger’, and
‘genera’ and ‘varieties’. Since these inferential
‘pseudo-redundancies’ and ‘cross-references’, jointly
with the conceptual network as a whole, tend to
confirm the conclusion of the first analysis relatively
to Darwin’s stance on the dual use of ‘evolution’,
it seems reasonable to conclude that the concept of
evolution in the Origin of Species refers mostly to
specific development, inferences made to embryo-
logical development being rather rare.
4 Interpretations and Further
Improvements
The development of this concept-mining procedure
is still at an early stage; however, some early con-
clusion might already be drawn. Indeed, results
from both analyses tend to bring the sixth edition
of the Origin of Species closer to the contemporary
works of the more mature Herbert Spencer, who
began in the 1860s to de-emphasize the connection
between embryology and the general process of
‘evolution’, and thus contributed to forge the pre-
sent, strictly specific and most commonly known
biological use of the word ‘evolution’. Such a con-
ceptual shift is obvious in his Principles of Biology
(1863–1864): in this work, the chapter on embry-
ology is specifically entitled ‘Development’ and a
footnote is added by the author, ‘explaining that
Fig. 2 Conceptual analysis of evolution, evolve, and evolved
The concept of evolution in the Origin of Species
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 333
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
‘‘development’’ and ‘‘evolution’’ refer to different
types of processes’ (Bowler, 1975). The present re-
search seems to show that Darwin’s concept of evo-
lution in the sixth edition of the Origin of Species
follows, in a rather implicit or indirect way,
Spencer’s own treatment of the concept in its lex-
icalized form.
Of course, these interpretations, along with the
results and method that made them possible, are
not in any way definitive. Further improvements
and modifications in the iterative concordance
clustering process are to be expected, which will
probably alter the results obtained as well as their
interpretation. For instance, no stemming was
performed on the Origin of Species in the process-
ing stage; such an operation might allow for the
emergence of new ‘characteristic words’. It is also
expected that different clustering algorithms may
produce different results, as a previous study
from the laboratory has shown (Chartier et al.,
2010). Furthermore, instead of only choosing
the highest TF.IDF-ranked words of each cluster
in which ‘evolution’, ‘evolve’, or ‘evolved’ occurs,
more precise and sophisticated term selection
methods might be chosen, a decision which
could also significantly modify the conceptual
analysis’ results. However important these even-
tual improvements may be, it is reasonable to
expect that the theoretical outcome of the present
research will still prevail: the concept of evolution
in the Origin of Species seems more akin to
its modern, ‘spencerian’ and solely specific
account than its earlier, both embryological and
specific, use.
