Non-traditional prosodic features
for automated phrase break
prediction
............................................................................................................................................................
Claire Brierley and Eric Atwell
University of Leeds, UK
.......................................................................................................................................
Abstract
It is universally recognized that humans process speech and language in chunks,
each meaningful in itself. Any two renditions or assimilations of a given sentence
will exhibit similarities and discrepancies in the distribution of phrase breaks.
Automated phrase break prediction assigns pauses to plain text as input, eval-
uated against human performance encapsulated in ‘gold standard’ boundary
annotations in a speech corpus. This article advocates an enhanced feature set
for phrase break prediction, incorporating non-traditional prosodic features.
The authors have developed ProPOSEL, a prosody and part-of-speech English
lexicon, as text annotation and text analytics tool. Application of ProPOSEL has
so far uncovered a statistically significant correlation in English between certain
sound patterns (i.e. the diphthongs and triphthongs of Received Pronunciation)
and phrase breaks in very different genres. Thus, presence or absence of a com-
plex vowel could easily be incorporated as an extra non-traditional classificatory
feature in phrase break models. Our approach also suggests new possibilities
for statistical analysis of texts, particularly authorship and genre, via favoured
sound and rhythmic patterns in addition to lexis. Moreover, we suggest that our
approach of text data-mining descriptive annotations of projected prosody for
Text-to-Speech Synthesis and stylistic analysis is applicable to other languages.
.................................................................................................................................................................................
1 Introduction
It is universally recognized that humans process
speech and language in chunks, each meaningful
in itself. This research explores the variety of linguis-
tic cues native speakers use to signal or tune into
chunk boundaries via discussion and experimenta-
tion. In written English, prominent boundaries
are marked by punctuation, which the authors
interpret as a form of prosodic-syntactic annotation,
denoting chunks of meaning intended by the
writer and picked up by the reader. Conversely, in
a corpus of transcribed speech, boundary annota-
tions represent perceived pauses in the speech
stream.
Punctuation may not reflect all such chunks. In
this extract from Jane Eyre, a succession of elongated
vowel sounds—the diphthongs rain, away, and
wildly—plus an opportunistic syntactic boundary
between two prepositional phrases (in bold) may
subconsciously influence readers to pause after
wildly, as in this example:
. . . At intervals, while turning over the leaves
in my book, I studied the aspect of that winter
afternoon. Afar, it offered a pale blank of mist
and cloud; near, a scene of wet lawn and
storm-beat shrub, with ceaseless rain sweep-
ing away wildly before a long and lament-
able blast . . .
Correspondence:
Claire Brierley,
School of Computing,
University of Leeds,
Woodhouse Lane,
Leeds LS2 9JTT, UK
E-mail:
scscb@leeds.ac.uk
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011.  The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of ALLC. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
279
doi:10.1093/llc/fqr023 Advance Access published on 13 May 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
(From Chapter 1 of Jane Eyre by Charlotte
Bronte¨, 1847)
The reverse might happen in the following breath-
lessly chunked fragment from a transcript of 1980s
BBC radio newsreel in SEC, the Spoken English
Corpus (Taylor and Knowles, 1988).
. . . I jumped in | and we set off | at the manic
speed | which for some reason | is a charac-
teristic | of the way all journalists drive | here
in El Salvador | . . .
(From Section A of the Spoken English Corpus)
By elision across a boundary—reason’s versus reason
| is—and coarticulation across a boundary—charac-
teristicof versus characteristic | of—we can craft
lengthier, more ‘chilled out’ phrasing in the
bolded section.
2 Phrase Break Prediction and the
Challenge of Modelling Human
Psycholinguistic Chunking
The goal of automated phrase break prediction is
to emulate human performance in terms of natur-
alness and intelligibility when assigning prosodic-
syntactic boundaries to input text. Techniques can
be deterministic or probabilistic. Phrase break
models exemplifying these two generic approaches
are the chinks ‘n’ chunks algorithm (Liberman and
Church, 1992) and Taylor and Black’s Markov
model (1998). The former inserts a boundary after
punctuation and whenever the input string matches
the sequence: open-class or content word (chunk)
immediately followed by closed-class or function
word (chink), based on the principle that chinks
initiate new prosodic phrases. The latter conditions
the probability of juncture type (break or non-
break) at any given point on: (i) the prior probability
of a break or non-break given the immediate syn-
tactic context (i.e. the part-of-speech or PoS trigram
in which that juncture is embedded); and (ii) the
likelihood of a break or non-break at that point
given the previous sequence of N juncture types—
where, in the best performing model, N¼ 6.
However, as we have just illustrated, there are
usually alternative parsing and phrasing strategies
for a given sentence and therefore evaluation
against one prosodic-syntactic variant is problemat-
ic (Taylor and Black, 1998; Atterer and Klein, 2002;
Brierley and Atwell, 2008a). Moreover, as illustrated
in the Section 1, other linguistic features may influ-
ence boundary placement in addition to the syntac-
tic and text-based cues traditionally used. These
‘non-traditional’ features emerge from our interna-
lized experience (and hence knowledge) of the phys-
icality of language: the sound system and rhythm of
our native tongue; it is these features which engage
our interest here.
Developing a better model of human psycholin-
guistic chunking for applications like text-to-speech
synthesis (Sanderman, 1994) may well, in our view,
entail reinstating a priori linguistic knowledge
of prosody to complement traditional features
(i.e. syntax and punctuation). This echoes current
thinking in the wider research community: extend-
ing knowledge sources to supplement raw training
data, and hence improve performance, is seen as
a challenge for automatic speech recognition1 and
machine learning in general (PASCAL, 2008).
3 ProPOSEL: A Prosody and PoS
Text Annotation Tool
To this end, the authors have developed ProPOSEL
(Brierley, forthcoming), a prosody and PoS
English lexicon of 104,049 entries, for text annota-
tion and text analytics, supported by a comprehen-
sive software tutorial. The latter expounds the
computational steps necessary to annotate text
with descriptive categories for syntactic, phonetic,
and prosodic attributes. Table 1 gives an example
of the finished article, a fragment of newsreel tagged
via ProPOSEL, with word tokens mapped to sym-
bolic representations as follows: two variant
PoS-tagging schemes (LOB2 and C53); DISC4 phon-
etic transcriptions; default open and closed-class
word categories; syllable counts; lexical stress pat-
terns (i.e. abstract representations of word-internal
rhythm, as in 201 for disappear, with secondary
stress on the first syllable and primary stress on
C. Brierley and E. Atwell
280 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
the final syllable); and finally an additional bound-
ary classification derived from corpus annotations
in SEC.
4 ProPOSEL and Text Analytics
In the Section 1, we cite a relatively long (12 words)
unpunctuated fragment from Jane Eyre, where the
writer can, in a sense, depend on readers to partition
it naturally because their innate sense of prosody
compels them to. In recital, we would probably
need to pause between wildly and before in this
fragment because of the effort required to produce
the succession of long vowels and diphthongs in:
‘. . . ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly . . .’. It is
our contention that: (i) even in silent reading,
people are sensitive to the prosody inherent in text
(cf. Donald, 1993 p. 248; Fodor, 2002); (ii) certain
sound patterns are tantamount to linguistic signs
for phrase breaks; (iii) such patterns can be
extracted from the lexicon and reconceptualized as
categorical features for phrase break classification in
the same way that real-world knowledge of syntax
is represented in PoS tags; and (iv) such features
are potentially very useful because they are
domain independent and can be projected onto
any corpus.
In a recent paper for Literary and Linguistic
Computing (Brierley and Atwell, 2010), we use sig-
nificance testing to evaluate the association between
one such sound pattern, the subset of complex
vowels (i.e. the eight diphthongs and triphthongs
of Received Pronunciation in Roach, 2000: 21–4),
and phrase breaks in Book 1 of Milton’s Paradise
Lost and find they are highly correlated. Table 2
shows a fragment from Book 1 (lines 17–18)
tagged with ProPOSEL. Here, two out of three
pre-boundary tokens (in bold) contain a complex
vowel.
5 Significance Testing
We have observed this same marked association
between junctures and diphthong/triphthong-
bearing words (see items in bold) in spontaneous
Table 2 Extract from Paradise Lost (Book 1, lines 17–18) tagged via ProPOSEL with symbolic tokens for: syllable count;
lexical stress, content-function word status; DISC phonetic transcription; DISC syllables mapped to stress weightings;
and phrase break annotations
. . .th’ upright heart and pure,
Instruct me, for Thou know’st. . .
[’th’, ’No_match‘, nonBreak]
[’upright’, [’2’, ‘10’, ’C’, "’Vp-r2t", "’Vp:1 r2t:0"], nonBreak]
[’heart’, [’1’, ’1’, ’C’, "’h#t", "’h#t:1"], nonBreak]
[’and’, [’1’, ’1’, ’F’, "’{nd", "’{nd:1"], nonBreak]
[‘pure’, [‘1’, ‘1’, ‘C’, ‘‘ ‘pj9R’’, ‘‘ ‘pj9R:1’’], break]
[’instruct’, [’2’, ’01’, ’C’, "In-’strVkt", "In:0 ’strVkt:1"], nonBreak]
[‘me’, [‘1’, ‘1’, ‘F’, ‘‘ ‘mi’’, ‘‘ ‘mi:1’’], break]
[’for’, [’1’, ’1’, ’F’, "’f$R", "’f$R:1"], nonBreak]
[’thou’, [’1’, ’1’, ’F’, "’D6", "’D6:1"], nonBreak]
[‘‘know’st’’, ‘No_match’, break]
Table 1 Newsreel fragment annotated via ProPOSEL,
mapping word tokens to: PoS tags from LOB and C5;
DISC phonetic transcriptions; content-function word
tags; syllable counts; lexical stress patterns; and phrase
break annotations
the, ATI, AT0, ’Di, F, 1, 1, nonBreak
most, QL, AV0, ’m5st, C, 1, 1, nonBreak
eerie, JJ, AJ0, ’7-rI, C, 2, 10, break
the, ATI, AT0, ’Di, F, 1, 1, nonBreak
scariest, JJT, AJS, ’sk8-rI-Ist, C, 3, 100,
break
Non-traditional prosodic features
Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011 281
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
speech from the twentieth century (see Listing 2
for this same fragment tagged with ProPOSEL).
. . . every correspondent here | agrees | that the
final | six mile stretch | through Suchitoto | is
the most eerie | the scariest | bit of road | in El
Salvador | . . .
However, what we construe as a pattern may in fact
be quite random, simply because both phenomena
crop up all over the place and are therefore
bound to co-occur. Thus, we undertake significance
testing to verify this insight using the chi-squared
statistic.
As summarized in Table 3, we now have empir-
ical evidence that the perceived correlation is statis-
tically significant in three very different styles of
speech: a scripted lecture; informal news commen-
tary; and seventeenth century verse (Brierley, forth-
coming). The rightmost column in the table gives
the chi-squared 2 statistic for each experiment,
calculated from raw counts for four groups of data
(word tokens as breaks, non-breaks, diphthongs,
or non-diphthongs), plus the total word count.
Basically, we compare frequency distributions for
target phenomena in our experimental dataset(s),
namely the observed frequencies, to theoretical fre-
quencies, those expected for chance co-occurrence;
then, if observed and expected frequencies are suf-
ficiently different and the difference exceeds some
pre-determined confidence level, we surmise that
the observed pattern/correlation is, in all probabil-
ity, not random. In all our experiments, this pre-
determined confidence level is very rigorous: 99%
plus. This is given by the two-tailed p-value in the
‘Result’ column. A low p-value is a measure of the
improbability of obtaining a similar result if our
variables are truly independent; a two-tailed
p-value considers the discrepancy in population
means when either group has the larger mean. For
99% confidence, we are looking for a p-value of
0.01; our results (p-values of < 0.0001) out-perform
this.
6 Conclusions
Through automated phrase break prediction, we
model our understanding of human psycholinguis-
tic chunking by identifying textual cues and super-
imposing a priori linguistic knowledge to develop
feature sets for training classifiers. We then evaluate
our classifier or model via the number of ‘correct’
boundaries retrieved in unseen text via comparison
with that same text complete with gold standard
Table 3 Summary of empirical evidence of a statistically significant correlation between complex vowels and phrase
breaks in three contrasting styles of British English speech
Text genre Corpus size ‘Vintage’ Participants Result
Transcribed speech:
Reith lecture
2293 words British English 1980s Single speaker
Two annotators
2¼ 49
1 degrees freedom
2-tailed p-value
<0.0001
Transcribed speech:
Informal news
commentary
7762 words British English 1980s Ten speakers
Both genders
Two annotators
2¼71
1 degrees freedom
2-tailed p-value
<0.0001
Poetry: Milton’s
blank verse
6000 words Early Modern English 1674 Poet and his publishers
and his readers
2¼ 138
1 degrees freedom
2-tailed p-value
<0.0001
C. Brierley and E. Atwell
282 Literary and Linguistic Computing, Vol. 26, No. 3, 2011
 at U
B Leipzig on January 11, 2012
http://llc.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
phrase break annotations. The latter only represents
one chunk parse for a given sentence, however, and
classifier insertion and deletion errors may in fact
capture variant intelligible and naturalistic phrasing.
Moreover, models trained and tested on one corpus
(i.e. one phrasing variant) perform less well in
other domains.
One factor which may influence speakers’
dynamic phrasing strategies and account for bound-
ary placement or withholding in identical part-of-
speech sequences is the immediate phonetic and
rhythmic boundary context. Moreover, we support
the view, cited earlier in this article (Section 4),
that competent human readers are sensitive to the
sounds and rhythms symbolized by the orthograph-
ic form, and that internalized and projected prosody
informs silent reading. We therefore contend that
phrase break models are insufficiently equipped
to emulate human performance without prosodic
information. This has yet to be tested.
We have therefore created ProPOSEL, a tool
for annotating text with canonical and categorical
representations of sound and rhythm as potential
additional features for phrase break prediction.
Such features constitute an alternative to acoustic
representation of prosody, and are innately
domain independent. We have a fully annotated
dataset of spontaneous speech (1980s BBC radio
newsreel from SEC) which we have used along
with samples from two contrasting spoken genres
to verify a perceived association between complex
vowels and phrase breaks. Thus, presence or absence
of a complex vowel could easily be incorporated
as an extra non-traditional classificatory feature
in phrase break models. The significant correlation
between this vowel subset and syntactic-rhythmic
junctures in seventeenth century English verse,
for example, also advocates further application of
ProPOSEL for text analytics and stylistic analysis
of (literary) texts and authorship attribution via
prosodic as well as lexical, syntactic, and semantic
attributes. Moreover, this principle of uncovering
intrinsic phrase break signifiers and stylistic patterns
is transferable to Arabic via a pronunciation lexicon
modelled on ProPOSEL, to complement traditional
models of Arabic prosody (El-Qawasmeh and Aref,
1999).
